JUVENILE POEMS.

1801.




TO JOSEPH ATKINSON, ESQ.

MY DEAR SIR,


I feel a very sincere pleasure in dedicating to you the Second Edition of
our friend LITTLE'S Poems. I am not unconscious that there are many in the
collection which perhaps it would be prudent to have altered or omitted;
and, to say the truth, I more than once revised them for that purpose;
but, I know not why, I distrusted either my heart or my judgment; and the
consequence is you have them in their original form:

   _non possunt nostros multae, Faustine, liturae
        emendare jocos; una litura potest_.

I am convinced, however, that, though not quite a _casuiste relâché_, you
have charity enough to forgive such inoffensive follies: you know that the
pious Beza was not the less revered for those sportive Juvenilia which he
published under a fictitious name; nor did the levity of Bembo's poems
prevent him from making a very good cardinal.

Believe me, my dear friend.

With the truest esteem,

Yours,

T. M.

_April 19, 1802_






JUVENILE POEMS






FRAGMENTS OF COLLEGE EXERCISES.


    _Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus_.--JUV.


Mark those proud boasters of a splendid line,
Like gilded ruins, mouldering while they shine,
How heavy sits that weight, of alien show,
Like martial helm upon an infant's brow;
Those borrowed splendors whose contrasting light
Throws back the native shades in deeper night.

Ask the proud train who glory's train pursue,
Where are the arts by which that glory grew?
The genuine virtues with that eagle-gaze
Sought young Renown in all her orient blaze!
Where is the heart by chymic truth refined,
The exploring soul whose eye had read mankind?
Where are the links that twined, with heavenly art,
His country's interest round the patriot's heart?

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Justum bellum quibus necessarium, et pia arma quibus nulla nisi in
    armis relinquitur spes_.--LIVY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Is there no call, no consecrating cause
Approved by Heav'n, ordained by nature's laws,
Where justice flies the herald of our way,
And truth's pure beams upon the banners play?

Yes, there's a call sweet as an angel's breath
To slumbering babes or innocence in death;
And urgent as the tongue of Heaven within,
When the mind's balance trembles upon sin.

Oh! 'tis our country's voice, whose claim should meet
An echo in the soul's most deep retreat;
Along the heart's responding chords should run,
Nor let a tone there vibrate--but the one!







TO A BOY, WITH A WATCH,

WRITTEN FOR A FRIEND


Is it not sweet, beloved youth,
  To rove through Erudition's bowers,
And cull the golden fruits of truth,
  And gather Fancy's brilliant flowers?

And is it not more sweet than this,
  To feel thy parents' hearts approving,
And pay them back in sums of bliss
  The dear, the endless debt of loving?

It must be so to thee, my youth;
  With this idea toil is lighter;
This sweetens all the fruits of truth,
  And makes the flowers of fancy brighter.

The little gift we send thee, boy,
  May sometimes teach thy soul to ponder,
If indolence or siren joy
  Should ever tempt that soul to wander.

'Twill tell thee that the wingèd day
  Can, ne'er be chain'd by man's endeavor;
That life and time shall fade away,
  While heaven and virtue bloom forever!






SONG.


If I swear by that eye, you'll allow,
  Its look is so shifting and new,
That the oath I might take on it now
  The very next glance would undo.

Those babies that nestle so sly
  Such thousands of arrows have got,
That an oath, on the glance of an eye
  Such as yours, may be off in a shot.

Should I swear by the dew on your lip,
  Though each moment the treasure renews,
If my constancy wishes to trip,
  I may kiss off the oath when I choose.

Or a sigh may disperse from that flower;
  Both the dew and the oath that are there;
And I'd make a new vow every hour,
  To lose them so sweetly in air.

But clear up the heaven of your brow,
  Nor fancy my faith is a feather;
On my heart I will pledge you my vow,
  And they both must be broken together!






TO .......


Remember him thou leavest behind,
  Whose heart is warmly bound to thee,
Close as the tenderest links can bind
  A heart as warm as heart can be.

Oh! I had long in freedom roved,
  Though many seemed my soul to snare;
'Twas passion when I thought I loved,
  'Twas fancy when I thought them fair.

Even she, my muse's early theme,
  Beguiled me only while she warmed;
Twas young desire that fed the dream,
  And reason broke what passion formed.

But thou-ah! better had it been
  If I had still in freedom roved,
If I had ne'er thy beauties seen,
  For then I never should have loved.

Then all the pain which lovers feel
  Had never to this heart been known;
But then, the joys that lovers steal,
  Should _they_ have ever been my own?

Oh! trust me, when I swear thee this,
  Dearest! the pain of loving thee,
The very pain is sweeter bliss
  Than passion's wildest ecstasy.

That little cage I would not part,
  In which my soul is prisoned now,
For the most light and winged heart
  That wantons on the passing vow.

Still, my beloved! still keep in mind,
  However far removed from me,
That there is one thou leavest behind,
  Whose heart respires for only thee!

And though ungenial ties have bound
  Thy fate unto another's care,
That arm, which clasps thy bosom round,
  Cannot confine the heart that's there.

No, no! that heart is only mine
  By ties all other ties above,
For I have wed it at a shrine
  Where we have had no priest but Love.






SONG.


When Time who steals our years away
  Shall steal our pleasures too,
The memory of the past will stay
  And half our joys renew,
Then, Julia, when thy beauty's flower
  Shall feel the wintry air,
Remembrance will recall the hour
  When thou alone wert fair.
Then talk no more of future gloom;
  Our joys shall always last;
For Hope shall brighten days to come,
  And Memory gild the past.

Come, Chloe, fill the genial bowl,
  I drink to Love and thee:
Thou never canst decay in soul,
  Thou'lt still be young for me.
And as thy; lips the tear-drop chase,
  Which on my cheek they find,
So hope shall steal away the trace
  That sorrow leaves behind.
Then fill the bowl--away with gloom!
  Our joys shall always last;
For Hope shall brighten days to come,
  And Memory gild the past.

But mark, at thought of future years
  When love shall lose its soul,
My Chloe drops her timid tears,
  They mingle with my bowl.
How like this bowl of wine, my fair,
  Our loving life shall fleet;
Though tears may sometimes mingle there,
  The draught will still be sweet.
Then fill the cup--away with gloom!
  Our joys shall always last;
For Hope will brighten days to come,
  And Memory gild the past.






SONG.


Have you not seen the timid tear,
  Steal trembling from mine eye?
Have you not marked the flush of fear,
  Or caught the murmured sigh?
And can you think my love is chill,
  Nor fixt on you alone?
And can you rend, by doubting still,
  A heart so much your own?

To you my soul's affections move,
  Devoutly, warmly true;
My life has been a task of love,
  One long, long thought of you.
If all your tender faith be o'er,
  If still my truth you'll try;
Alas, _I_ know but _one_ proof more--
  I'll bless your name, and die!






REUBEN AND ROSE.

A TALE OF ROMANCE.


The darkness that hung upon Willumberg's walls
  Had long been remembered with awe and dismay;
For years not a sunbeam had played in its halls,
  And it seemed as shut out from the regions of day.

Though the valleys were brightened by many a beam,
  Yet none could the woods of that castle illume;
And the lightning which flashed on the neighboring stream
  Flew back, as if fearing to enter the gloom!

"Oh! when shall this horrible darkness disperse!"
  Said Willumberg's lord to the Seer of the Cave;--
"It can never dispel," said the wizard of verse,
  "Till the bright star of chivalry sinks in the wave!"

And who was the bright star of chivalry then?
  Who _could_ be but Reuben, the flower of the age?
For Reuben was first in the combat of men,
  Though Youth had scarce written his name on her page.

For Willumberg's daughter his young heart had beat,
  For Rose, who was bright as the spirit of dawn,
When with wand dropping diamonds, and silvery feet,
  It walks o'er the flowers of the mountain and lawn.

Must Rose, then, from Reuben so fatally sever?
  Sad, sad were the words of the Seer of the Cave,
That darkness should cover that castle forever,
  Or Reuben be sunk in the merciless wave!

To the wizard she flew, saying, "Tell me, oh, tell?
  Shall my Reuben no more be restored to my eyes?"
"Yes, yes--when a spirit shall toll the great bell
  Of the mouldering abbey, your Reuben shall rise!"

Twice, thrice he repeated "Your Reuben shall rise!"
  And Rose felt a moment's release from her pain;
And wiped, while she listened, the tears from her eyes.
  And hoped she might yet see her hero again.

That hero could smite at the terrors of death,
  When he felt that he died for the sire of his Rose;
To the Oder he flew, and there, plunging beneath,
  In the depth of the billows soon found his repose.--

How strangely the order of destiny falls!
  Not long in the waters the warrior lay,
When a sunbeam was seen to glance over the walls,
  And the castle of Willumberg basked in the ray!

All, all but the soul of the maid was in light,
  There sorrow and terror lay gloomy and blank:
Two days did she wander, and all the long night,
  In quest of her love, on the wide river's bank.

Oft, oft did she pause for the toll of the bell,
  And heard but the breathings of night in the air;
Long, long did she gaze on the watery swell,
  And saw but the foam of the white billow there.

And often as midnight its veil would undraw,
  As she looked at the light of the moon in the stream,
She thought 'twas his helmet of silver she saw,
  As the curl of the surge glittered high in the beam.

And now the third night was begemming the sky;
  Poor Rose, on the cold dewy margent reclined,
There wept till the tear almost froze in her eye,
  When--hark!--'twas the bell that came deep in the wind!

She startled, and saw, through the glimmering shade,
  A form o'er the waters in majesty glide;
She knew 'twas her love, though his cheek was decayed,
And his helmet of silver was washed by the tide.

Was this what the Seer of the Cave had foretold?--
  Dim, dim through the phantom the moon shot a gleam;
'Twas Reuben, but, ah! he was deathly and cold,
  And fleeted away like the spell of a dream!

Twice, thrice did he rise, and as often she thought
  From the bank to embrace him, but vain her endeavor!
Then, plunging beneath, at a billow she caught,
  And sunk to repose on its bosom forever!









ANACREONTIC.


    --_in lachrymas verterat omne merum_.
    TIB. lib. i. eleg. 5.


Press the grape, and let it pour
Around the board its purple shower:
And, while the drops my goblet steep,
I'll think in woe the clusters weep.

Weep on, weep on, my pouting vine!
Heaven grant no tears, but tears of wine.
Weep on; and, as thy sorrows flow,
I'll taste the luxury of woe.







TO JULIA.

IN ALLUSION TO SOME ILLIBERAL CRITICISMS.


Why, let the stingless critic chide
With all that fume of vacant pride
Which mantles o'er the pendant fool,
Like vapor on a stagnant pool.
Oh! if the song, to feeling true,
Can please the elect, the sacred few,
Whose souls, by Taste and Nature taught,
Thrill with the genuine pulse of thought--
If some fond feeling maid like thee,
The warm-eyed child of Sympathy,
Shall say, while o'er my simple theme
She languishes in Passion's dream,
"He was, indeed, a tender soul--
 No critic law, no chill control,
 Should ever freeze, by timid art,
 The flowings of so fond a heart!"
Yes, soul of Nature! soul of Love!
That, hovering like a snow-winged dove,
Breathed o'er my cradle warblings wild,
And hailed me Passion's warmest child,--
Grant me the tear from Beauty's eye,
From Feeling's breast the votive sigh;
Oh! let my song, my memory find,
A shrine within the tender mind!
And I will smile when critics chide,
And I will scorn the fume of pride
Which mantles o'er the pendant fool,
Like vapor round some stagnant pool!






TO JULIA.


Mock me no more with Love's beguiling dream,
  A dream, I find, illusory as sweet:
One smile of friendship, nay, of cold esteem,
  Far dearer were than passion's bland deceit!

I've heard you oft eternal truth declare;
  Your heart was only mine, I once believed.
Ah! shall I say that all your vows were air?
  And _must_ I say, my hopes were all deceived?

Vow, then, no longer that our souls are twined
  That all our joys are felt with mutual zeal;
Julia!--'tis pity, pity makes you kind;
  You know I love, and you would _seem_ to feel.

But shall I still go seek within those arms
  A joy in which affection takes no part?
No, no, farewell! you give me but your charms,
  When I had fondly thought you gave your heart.






THE SHRINE.

TO .......


My fates had destined me to rove
A long, long pilgrimage of love;
And many an altar on my way
Has lured my pious steps to stay;
For if the saint was young and fair,
I turned, and sung my vespers there.
This, from a youthful pilgrim's fire,
Is what your pretty saints require:
To pass, nor tell a single bead,
With them would be profane indeed!
But, trust me, all this young devotion
Was but to keep my zeal in motion;
And, every humbler altar past,
I now have reached THE SHRINE at last!






TO A LADY,

WITH SOME MANUSCRIPT POEMS,

ON LEAVING THE COUNTRY.


When, casting many a look behind,
  I leave the friends I cherish here--
Perchance some other friends to find,
  But surely finding none so dear--

Haply the little simple page,
  Which votive thus I've traced for thee,
May now and then a look engage,
  And steal one moment's thought for me.

But, oh! in pity let not those
  Whose hearts are not of gentle mould,
Let not the eye that seldom flows
  With feeling's tear, my song behold.

For, trust me, they who never melt
  With pity, never melt with love;
And such will frown at all I've felt,
  And all my loving lays reprove.

But if, perhaps, some gentler mind,
  Which rather loves to praise than blame,
Should in my page an interest find.
  And linger kindly on my name;

Tell him--or, oh! if, gentler still,
  By female lips my name be blest:
For where do all affections thrill
  So sweetly as in woman's breast?--

Tell her, that he whose loving themes
  Her eye indulgent wanders o'er,
Could sometimes wake from idle dreams,
  And bolder flights of fancy soar;

That Glory oft would claim the lay,
  And Friendship oft his numbers move;
But whisper then, that, "sooth to say,
  His sweetest song was given to Love!"






TO JULIA.


Though Fate, my girl, may bid us part,
  Our souls it cannot, shall not sever;
The heart will seek its kindred heart,
  And cling to it as close as ever.

But must we, must we part indeed?
  Is all our dream of rapture over?
And does not Julia's bosom bleed
  To leave so dear, so fond a lover?

Does _she_, too, mourn?--Perhaps she may;
  Perhaps she mourns our bliss so fleeting;
But why is Julia's eye so gay,
  If Julia's heart like mine is beating?

I oft have loved that sunny glow
  Of gladness in her blue eye beaming--
But can the bosom bleed with woe
  While joy is in the glances beaming?

No, no!--Yet, love, I will not chide;
  Although your heart _were_ fond of roving,
Nor that, nor all the world beside
  Could keep your faithful boy from loving.

You'll soon be distant from his eye,
  And, with you, all that's worth possessing.
Oh! then it will be sweet to die,
  When life has lost its only blessing!






TO .......


Sweet lady, look not thus again:
  Those bright, deluding smiles recall
A maid remember'd now with pain,
  Who was my love, my life, my all!

Oh! while this heart bewildered took
  Sweet poison from her thrilling eye,
Thus would she smile and lisp and look,
  And I would hear and gaze and sigh!

Yes, I did love her--wildly love--
  She was her sex's best deceiver!
And oft she swore she'd never rove--
  And I was destined to believe her!

Then, lady, do not wear the smile
  Of one whose smile could thus betray;
Alas! I think the lovely wile
  Again could steal my heart away.

For, when those spells that charmed my mind
  On lips so pure as thine I see,
I fear the heart which she resigned
  Will err again and fly to thee!






NATURE'S LABELS.

A FRAGMENT.


In vain we fondly strive to trace
The soul's reflection in the face;
In vain we dwell on lines and crosses,
Crooked mouth or short proboscis;
Boobies have looked as wise and bright
As Plato or the Stagirite:
And many a sage and learned skull
Has peeped through windows dark and dull.
Since then, though art do all it can,
We ne'er can reach the inward man,
Nor (howsoe'er "learned Thebans" doubt)
The inward woman, from without,
Methinks 'twere well if nature could
(And Nature could, if Nature would)
Some pithy, short descriptions write
On tablets large, in black and white,
Which she might hang about our throttles,
Like labels upon physic-bottles;
And where all men might read--but stay--
As dialectic sages say,
The argument most apt and ample
For common use is the example.
For instance, then, if Nature's care
Had not portrayed, in lines so fair,
The inward soul of Lucy Lindon.
_This_ is the label she'd have pinned on.

LABEL FIRST.

Within this form there lies enshrined
The purest, brightest gem of mind.
Though Feeling's hand may sometimes throw
Upon its charms the shade of woe,
The lustre of the gem, when veiled,
Shall be but mellowed, not concealed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, sirs, imagine, if you're able,
That Nature wrote a second label,
They're her own words--at least suppose so--
And boldly pin it on Pomposo.

LABEL SECOND.

When I composed the fustian brain
Of this redoubted Captain Vain.
I had at hand but few ingredients,
And so was forced to use expedients.
I put therein some small discerning,
A grain of sense, a grain of learning;
And when I saw the void behind,
I filled it up with--froth and wind!

       *       *       *       *       *






TO JULIA

ON HER BIRTHDAY.


When Time was entwining the garland of years,
  Which to crown my beloved was given,
Though some of the leaves might be sullied with tears,
  Yet the flowers were all gathered in heaven.

And long may this garland be sweet to the eye,
  May its verdure forever be new;
Young Love shall enrich it with many a sigh,
  And Sympathy nurse it with dew.






A REFLECTION AT SEA.


See how, beneath the moonbeam's smile,
  Yon little billow heaves its breast,
And foams and sparkles for awhile,--
  Then murmuring subsides to rest.

Thus man, the sport of bliss and care,
  Rises on time's eventful sea:
And, having swelled a moment there,
  Thus melts into eternity!







THE SHIELD.


Say, did you not hear a voice of death!
  And did you not mark the paly form
Which rode on the silvery mist of the heath,
  And sung a ghostly dirge in the storm?

Was it the wailing bird of the gloom,
  That shrieks on the house of woe all night?
Or a shivering fiend that flew to a tomb,
  To howl and to feed till the glance of light?

'Twas _not_ the death-bird's cry from the wood,
  Nor shivering fiend that hung on the blast;
'Twas the shade of Helderic--man of blood--
  It screams for the guilt of days that are past.

See, how the red, red lightning strays,
  And scares the gliding ghosts of the heath!
Now on the leafless yew it plays,
  Where hangs the shield of this son of death.

That shield is blushing with murderous stains;
  Long has it hung from the cold yew's spray;
It is blown by storms and washed by rains,
  But neither can take the blood away!

Oft by that yew, on the blasted field,
  Demons dance to the red moon's light;
While the damp boughs creak, and the swinging shield
  Sings to the raving spirit of night!






TO JULIA WEEPING.


Oh! if your tears are given to care,
   If real woe disturbs your peace,
Come to my bosom, weeping fair!
  And I will bid your weeping cease.

But if with Fancy's visioned fears,
  With dreams of woe your bosom thrill;
You look so lovely in your tears,
  That I must bid you drop them still.







TO ROSA.

WRITTEN DURING ILLNESS.


The wisest soul, by anguish torn,
  Will soon unlearn the lore it knew;
And when the shrining casket's worn,
  The gem within will tarnish too.

But love's an essence of the soul,
  Which sinks hot with this chain of clay;
Which throbs beyond the chill control
  Of withering pain or pale decay.

And surely, when the touch of Death
  Dissolves the spirit's earthly ties,
Love still attends the immortal breath,
  And makes it purer for the skies!

Oh Rosa, when, to seek its sphere,
  My soul shall leave this orb of men,
That love which formed its treasure here,
  Shall be its _best_ of treasures then!

And as, in fabled dreams of old,
  Some air-born genius, child of time,
Presided o'er each star that rolled,
  And tracked it through its path sublime;

So thou, fair planet, not unled,
  Shalt through thy mortal orbit stray;
Thy lover's shade, to thee still wed,
  Shall linger round thy earthly way.

Let other spirits range the sky,
  And play around each starry gem;
I'll bask beneath that lucid eye,
  Nor envy worlds of suns to them.

And when that heart shall cease to beat,
  And when that breath at length is free,
Then, Rosa, soul to soul we'll meet,
  And mingle to eternity!








ON THE DEATH OF A LADY,


Sweet spirit! if thy airy sleep
  Nor sees my tears not hears my sighs,
Then will I weep, in anguish weep,
  Till the last heart's drop fills mine eyes.

But if thy sainted soul can feel,
  And mingles in our misery;
Then, then my breaking heart I'll seal--
  Thou shalt not hear one sigh from me.

The beam of morn was on the stream,
  But sullen clouds the day deform;
Like thee was that young, orient beam,
  Like death, alas, that sullen storm!

Thou wert not formed for living here,
  So linked thy soul was with the sky;
Yet, ah, we held thee all so dear,
  We thought thou wert not formed to die.






INCONSTANCY.


And do I then wonder that Julia deceives me,
  When surely there's nothing in nature more common?
She vows to be true, and while vowing she leaves me--
  And could I expect any more from a woman?

Oh, woman! your heart is a pitiful treasure;
  And Mahomet's doctrine was not too severe,
When he held that you were but materials of pleasure,
  And reason and thinking were out of your sphere.

By your heart, when the fond sighing lover can win it,
  He thinks that an age of anxiety's paid;
But, oh, while he's blest, let him die at the minute--
  If he live but a _day_, he'll be surely betrayed.






THE NATAL GENIUS.

A DREAM

TO .... ....

THE MORNING OF HER BIRTHDAY.


In witching slumbers of the night,
I dreamt I was the airy sprite
  That on thy natal moment smiled;
And thought I wafted on my wing
Those flowers which in Elysium spring,
  To crown my lovely mortal child.

With olive-branch I bound thy head,
Heart's ease along thy path I shed,
  Which was to bloom through all thy years;
Nor yet did I forget to bind
Love's roses, with his myrtle twined,
  And dewed by sympathetic tears.

Such was the wild but precious boon
Which Fancy, at her magic noon,
  Bade me to Nona's image pay;
And were it thus my fate to be
Thy little guardian deity,
  How blest around thy steps I'd play!

Thy life should glide in peace along,
Calm as some lonely shepherd's song
  That's heard at distance in the grove;
No cloud should ever dim thy sky,
No thorns along thy pathway lie,
  But all be beauty, peace and love.

Indulgent Time should never bring
To thee one blight upon his wing,
  So gently o'er thy brow he'd fly;
And death itself should but be felt
Like that of daybeams, when they melt,
  Bright to the last, in evening's sky!






ELEGIAC STANZAS.

SUPPOSED TO BE WRITTEN BY JULIA,

ON THE DEATH OF HER BROTHER.


Though sorrow long has worn my heart;
  Though every day I've, counted o'er
Hath brought a new and, quickening smart
  To wounds that rankled fresh before;

Though in my earliest life bereft
  Of tender links by nature tied;
Though hope deceived, and pleasure left;
  Though friends betrayed and foes belied;

I still had hopes--for hope will stay
  After the sunset of delight;
So like the star which ushers day,
  We scarce can think it heralds night!--

I hoped that, after all its strife,
  My weary heart at length should rest.
And, feinting from the waves of life,
  Find harbor in a brother's breast.

That brother's breast was warm with truth,
  Was bright with honor's purest ray;
He was the dearest, gentlest youth--
  Ah, why then was he torn away?

He should have stayed, have lingered here
  To soothe his Julia's every woe;
He should have chased each bitter tear,
  And not have caused those tears to flow.

We saw within his soul expand
  The fruits of genius, nurst by taste;
While Science, with a fostering hand,
  Upon his brow her chaplet placed.

We saw, by bright degrees, his mind
  Grow rich in all that makes men dear;
Enlightened, social, and refined,
  In friendship firm, in love sincere.

Such was the youth we loved so well,
  And such the hopes that fate denied;--
We loved, but ah! could scarcely tell
  How deep, how dearly, till he died!

Close as the fondest links could strain,
  Twined with my very heart he grew;
And by that fate which breaks the chain,
  The heart is almost broken too.






TO THE LARGE AND BEAUTIFUL MISS......,

IN ALLUSION TO SOME PARTNERSHIP IN A LOTTERY SHARE

IMPROMPTU.


    --_Ego Pars_--VIRG.


In wedlock a species of lottery lies,
  Where in blanks and in prizes we deal;
But how comes it that you, such a capital prize,
  Should so long have remained in the wheel?

If ever, by Fortune's indulgent decree,
  To me such a ticket should roll,
A sixteenth, Heaven knows! were sufficient for me;
  For what could _I_ do with the whole?






A DREAM.


I thought this heart enkindled lay
  On Cupid's burning shrine:
I thought he stole thy heart away,
  And placed it near to mine.

I saw thy heart begin to melt,
  Like ice before the sun;
Till both a glow congenial felt,
  And mingled into one!






TO  .......


With all my soul, then, let us part,
  Since both are anxious to be free;
And I will sand you home your heart,
  If you will send mine back to me.

We've had some happy hours together,
  But joy must often change its wing;
And spring would be but gloomy weather,
  If we had nothing else but spring.

'Tis not that I expect to find
  A more devoted, fond and true one,
With rosier cheek or sweeter mind--
  Enough for me that she's a new one.

Thus let us leave the bower of love,
  Where we have loitered long in bliss;
And you may down _that_ pathway rove,
  While I shall take my way through _this_.







TO JULIA.


I saw the peasant's hand unkind
  From yonder oak the ivy sever;
They seemed in very being twined;
  Yet now the oak is fresh as ever!

Not so the widowed ivy shines:
  Torn from its dear and only stay,
In drooping widowhood it pines,
  And scatters all its bloom away.

Thus, Julia, did our hearts entwine,
  Till Fate disturbed their tender ties:
Thus gay indifference blooms in thine,
  While mine, deserted, droops and dies!







SYMPATHY.

TO JULIA.


    --_sine me sit nulla Venus_.
    SULPICIA.


Our hearts, my love, were formed to be
The genuine twins of Sympathy,
  They live with one sensation;
In joy or grief, but most in love,
Like chords in unison they move,
  And thrill with like vibration.

How oft I've beard thee fondly say,
Thy vital pulse shall cease to play
  When mine no more is moving;
Since, now, to feel a joy _alone_
Were worse to thee than feeling none,
  So twined are we in loving!






THE TEAR.


On beds of snow the moonbeam slept,
  And chilly was the midnight gloom,
When by the damp grave Ellen wept--
  Fond maid! it was her Lindor's tomb!

A warm tear gushed, the wintry air,
  Congealed it as it flowed away:
All night it lay an ice-drop there,
  At morn it glittered in the ray.

An angel, wandering from her sphere,
  Who saw this bright, this frozen gem,
To dew-eyed Pity brought the tear
  And hung it on her diadem!







TO ROSA.


Is the song of Rosa mute?
Once such lays inspired her lute!
Never doth a sweeter song
Steal the breezy lyre along,
When the wind, in odors dying,
Woos it with enamor'd sighing.

  Is my Rosa's lute unstrung?
Once a tale of peace it sung
To her lover's throbbing breast--
Then was he divinely blest!
Ah! but Rosa loves no more,
Therefore Rosa's song is o'er;
And her lute neglected lies;
And her boy forgotten sighs.
Silent lute--forgotten lover--
Rosa's love and song are over!






ELEGIAC STANZAS.


    _Sic juvat perire_.


When wearied wretches sink to sleep,
 How heavenly soft their slumbers lie!
How sweet is death to those who weep,
To those who weep and long to die!

Saw you the soft and grassy bed,
  Where flowrets deck the green earth's breast?
'Tis there I wish to lay my head,
  'Tis there I wish to sleep at rest.

Oh, let not tears embalm my tomb,--
 None but the dews at twilight given!
Oh, let not sighs disturb the gloom,--
 None but the whispering winds of heaven!






LOVE AND MARRIAGE.


    _Eque brevi verbo ferre perenne malum_.
    SECUNDUS, eleg. vii.


Still the question I must parry,
  Still a wayward truant prove:
Where I love, I must not marry;
  Where I marry, can not love.

Were she fairest of creation,
  With the least presuming mind;
Learned without affectation;
  Not deceitful, yet refined;

Wise enough, but never rigid;
  Gay, but not too lightly free;
Chaste as snow, and yet not frigid:
  Fond, yet satisfied with me:

Were she all this ten times over,
  All that heaven to earth allows.
I should be too much her lover
  Ever to become her spouse.

Love will never bear enslaving;
  Summer garments suit him best;
Bliss itself is not worth having,
  If we're by compulsion blest.







THE SURPRISE.


Chloris, I swear, by all I ever swore,
That from this hour I shall not love thee more.--
"What! love no more? Oh! why this altered vow?"
Because I _can not_ love thee _more_
  --than _now_!






TO MISS .......

ON HER ASKING THE AUTHOR WHY SHE HAD SLEEPLESS NIGHTS.


I'll ask the sylph who round thee flies,
  And in thy breath his pinion dips,
Who suns him in thy radiant eyes,
  And faints upon thy sighing lips:

I'll ask him where's the veil of sleep
  That used to shade thy looks of light;
And why those eyes their vigil keep
  When other suns are sunk in night?

And I will say--her angel breast
  Has never throbbed with guilty sting;
Her bosom is the sweetest nest
  Where Slumber could repose his wing!

And I will say--her cheeks that flush,
  Like vernal roses in the sun,
Have ne'er by shame been taught to blush,
  Except for what her eyes have done!

Then tell me, why, thou child of air!
  Does slumber from her eyelids rove?
What is her heart's impassioned care?
  Perhaps, oh sylph! perhaps, 'tis _love_.






THE WONDER.


Come, tell me where the maid is found.
  Whose heart can love without deceit,
And I will range the world around,
  To sigh one moment at her feet.

Oh! tell me where's her sainted home,
  What air receives her blessed sigh,
A pilgrimage of years I'll roam
  To catch one sparkle of her eye!

And if her cheek be smooth and bright,
  While truth within her bosom lies,
I'll gaze upon her morn and night,
  Till my heart leave me through my eyes.

Show me on earth a thing so rare,
  I'll own all miracles are true;
To make one maid sincere and fair,
  Oh, 'tis the utmost Heaven can do!








ANACREONTIC.


Friend of my soul, this goblet sip,
  'Twill chase that pensive tear;
'Tis not so sweet as woman's lip,
  But, oh! 'tis more sincere.

  Like her delusive beam,
    'Twill steal away thy mind:
  But, truer than love's dream,
    It leaves no sting behind.

Come, twine the wreath, thy brows to shade;
  These flowers were culled at noon;--
Like woman's love the rose will fade,
  But, ah! not half so soon.
    For though the flower's decayed,
      Its fragrance is not o'er;
    But once when love's betrayed,
      Its sweet life blooms no more.







TO MRS,---.

ON HER BEAUTIFUL TRANSLATION OF VOITURE'S KISS.


    _Mon ame sur mon lèvre étoit lors toute entière.
    Pour savourer le miel qui sur la votre étoit;
    Mais en me retirant, elle resta derrière,
      Tant de ce doux plaisir l'amorce l'a restoit_.
                      VOITURE.


How heavenly was the poet's doom,
  To breathe his spirit through a kiss:
And lose within so sweet a tomb
  The trembling messenger of bliss!

And, sure his soul returned to feel
  That it _again_ could ravished be;
For in the kiss that thou didst steal,
  His life and soul have fled to thee.






RONDEAU.


"Good night! good night!"--And is it so?
And must I from my Rosa go?
Oh Rosa, say "Good night!" once more,
And I'll repeat it o'er and o'er,
Till the first glance of dawning light
Shall find us saying, still, "Good night."

And still "Good night," my Rosa, say--
But whisper still, "A minute stay;"
And I will stay, and every minute
Shall have an age of transport in it;
Till Time himself shall stay his flight,
To listen to our sweet "Good night."

"Good night!" you'll murmur with a sigh,
And tell me it is time to fly:
And I will vow, will swear to go,
While still that sweet voice murmurs "No!"
Till slumber seal our weary sight--
And then, my love, my soul, "Good night!"






SONG.


Why does azure deck the sky?
  'Tis to be like thy looks of blue.
Why is red the rose's dye?
  Because it is thy blushes' hue.
All that's fair, by Love's decree,
  Has been made resembling thee!

Why is falling snow so white,
  But to be like thy bosom fair!
Why are solar beams so bright?
  That they may seem thy golden hair!
All that's bright, by Love's decree,
Has been made resembling thee!

Why are nature's beauties felt?
 Oh! 'tis thine in her we see!
Why has music power to melt?
 Oh! because it speaks like thee.
All that's sweet, by Love's decree,
Has been made resembling thee!






TO ROSA.


Like one who trusts to summer skies,
  And puts his little bark to sea,
Is he who, lured by smiling eyes,
  Consigns his simple heart to thee.

For fickle is the summer wind,
  And sadly may the bark be tost;
For thou art sure to change thy mind,
  And then the wretched heart is lost!






WRITTEN IN A COMMONPLACE BOOK, CALLED "THE BOOK OF FOLLIES;"
IN WHICH EVERY ONE THAT OPENED IT WAS TO CONTRIBUTE SOMETHING.

TO THE BOOK OF FOLLIES.


This tribute's from a wretched elf,
Who hails thee, emblem of himself.
The book of life, which I have traced,
Has been, like thee, a motley waste
Of follies scribbled o'er and o'er,
One folly bringing hundreds more.
Some have indeed been writ so neat,
In characters so fair, so sweet,
That those who judge not too severely,
Have said they loved such follies dearly!
Yet still, O book! the allusion stands;
For these were penned by _female_ hands:
The rest--alas! I own the truth--
Have all been scribbled so uncouth
That Prudence, with a withering look,
Disdainful, flings away the book.
Like thine, its pages here and there
Have oft been stained with blots of care;
And sometimes hours of peace, I own,
Upon some fairer leaves have shone,
White as the snowings of that heaven
By which those hours of peace were given;
But now no longer--such, oh, such
The blast of Disappointment's touch!--
No longer now those hours appear;
Each leaf is sullied by a tear:
Blank, blank is every page with care,
Not even a folly brightens there.
Will they yet brighten?--never, never!
Then _shut the book_, O God, for ever!






TO ROSA.


Say, why should the girl of my soul be in tears
  At a meeting of rapture like this,
When the glooms of the past and the sorrow of years
  Have been paid by one moment of bliss?

Are they shed for that moment of blissful delight,
  Which dwells on her memory yet?
Do they flow, like the dews of the love-breathing night,
  From the warmth of the sun that has set?

Oh! sweet is the tear on that languishing smile,
  That smile, which is loveliest then;
And if such are the drops that delight can beguile,
  Thou shalt weep them again and again.







SONG.


Fly from the world, O Bessy! to me,
  Thou wilt never find any sincerer;
I'll give up the world, O Bessy! for thee,
  I can never meet any that's dearer.
Then tell me no more, with a tear and a sigh,
  That our loves will be censured by many;
All, all have their follies, and who will deny
  That ours is the sweetest of any?

When your lip has met mine, in communion so sweet,
  Have we felt as if virtue forbid it?--
Have we felt as if heaven denied them to meet?--
  No, rather 'twas heaven that did it.
So innocent, love, is the joy we then sip,
  So little of wrong is there in it,
That I wish all my errors were lodged on your lip,
  And I'd kiss them away in a minute.

Then come to your lover, oh! fly to his shed,
  From a world which I know thou despisest;
And slumber will hover as light o'er our bed!
  As e'er on the couch of the wisest.
And when o'er our pillow the tempest is driven,
  And thou, pretty innocent, fearest,
I'll tell thee, it is not the chiding of heaven,
  'Tis only our lullaby, dearest.

And, oh! while, we lie on our deathbed, my love,
  Looking back on the scene of our errors,
A sigh from my Bessy shall plead then above,
  And Death be disarmed of his terrors,
And each to the other embracing will say,
  "Farewell! let us hope we're forgiven."
Thy last fading glance will illumine the way,
  And a kiss be our passport to heaven!








THE RING[1]

A TALE


    _Annulus ille viri._
    OVID. _"Amor." lib. ii. eleg. 15_.


The happy day at length arrived
  When Rupert was to wed
The fairest maid in Saxony,
  And take her to his bed.

As soon as morn was in the sky,
  The feast and sports began;
The men admired the happy maid,
  The maids the happy man.

In many a sweet device of mirth
  The day was past along;
And some the featly dance amused,
  And some the dulcet song.

The younger maids with Isabel
  Disported through the bowers,
And decked her robe, and crowned her head
  With motley bridal flowers.

The matrons all in rich attire,
  Within the castle walls,
Sat listening to the choral strains
  That echoed, through the halls.

Young Rupert and his friends repaired
  Unto a spacious court,
To strike the bounding tennis-ball
  In feat and manly sport.

The bridegroom on his finger wore
  The wedding-ring so bright,
Which was to grace the lily hand
  Of Isabel that night.

And fearing he might break the gem,
  Or lose it in the play,
Hie looked around the court, to see
  Where he the ring might lay.

Now, in the court a statue stood,
  Which there full long had been;
It might a Heathen goddess be,
  Or else, a Heathen queen.

Upon its marble finger then
  He tried the ring to fit;
And, thinking it was safest there,
  Thereon he fastened it.

And now the tennis sports went on,
  Till they were wearied all,
And messengers announced to them
  Their dinner in the hall,

Young Rupert for his wedding-ring
  Unto the statue went;
But, oh, how shocked was he to find
  The marble finger bent!

The hand was closed upon the ring
  With firm and mighty clasp;
In vain he tried and tried and tried,
  He could not loose the grasp!

Then sore surprised was Rupert's mind--
  As well his mind might be;
"I'll come," quoth he, "at night again,
  "When none are here to see."

He went unto the feast, and much
  He thought upon his ring;
And marvelled sorely what could mean
  So very strange a thing!

The feast was o'er, and to the court
  He hied without delay,
Resolved to break the marble hand
  And force the ring away.

But, mark a stranger wonder still--
  The ring was there no more
And yet the marble hand ungrasped,
  And open as before!

He searched the base, and all the court,
  But nothing could he find;
Then to the castle hied he back
  With sore bewildered mind.

Within he found them all in mirth,
  The night in dancing flew:
The youth another ring procured,
  And none the adventure knew.

And now the priest has joined their hands,
  The hours of love advance:
Rupert almost forgets to think
  Upon the morn's mischance.

Within the bed fair Isabel
  In blushing sweetness lay,
Like flowers, half-opened by the
    dawn,
  And waiting for the day.

And Rupert, by her lovely side,
  In youthful beauty glows,
Like Phoebus, when he bends to cast
  His beams upon a rose.

And here my song would leave them both,
  Nor let the rest be told,
If 'twere not for the horrid tale
  It yet has to unfold.

Soon Rupert, 'twixt his bride and him
  A death cold carcass found;
He saw it not, but thought he felt
  Its arms embrace him round.

He started up, and then returned,
  But found the phantom still;
In vain he shrunk, it clipt him
    round,
  With damp and deadly chill!

And when he bent, the earthy lips
  A kiss of horror gave;
'Twas like the smell from charnel vaults,
  Or from the mouldering grave!

Ill-fated Rupert!--wild and loud
  Then cried he to his wife,
"Oh! save me from this horrid fiend,
  "My Isabel! my life!"

But Isabel had nothing seen,
  She looked around in vain;
And much she mourned the mad conceit
  That racked her Rupert's brain.

At length from this invisible
  These words to Rupert came:
(Oh God! while he did hear the words
  What terrors shook his frame!)

"Husband, husband, I've the ring
  "Thou gavest to-day to me;
"And thou'rt to me for ever wed,
  "As I am wed to thee!"

And all the night the demon lay
  Cold-chilling by his side,
And strained him with such deadly grasp,
  He thought he should have died.

But when the dawn of day was near,
  The horrid phantom fled,
And left the affrighted youth to weep
  By Isabel in bed.

And all that day a gloomy cloud
  Was seen on Rupert's brows;
Fair Isabel was likewise sad,
  But strove to cheer her spouse.

And, as the day advanced, he thought
  Of coming night with fear:
Alas, that he should dread to view
  The bed that should be dear!

At length the second night arrived,
  Again their couch they prest;
Poor Rupert hoped that all was o'er,
  And looked for love and rest.

But oh! when midnight came, again
  The fiend was at his side,
And, as it strained him in its grasp,
  With howl exulting cried:--

"Husband, husband, I've the ring,
  "The ring thou gavest to me;
"And thou'rt to me for ever wed,
  "As I am wed to thee!",

In agony of wild despair,
  He started from the bed;
And thus to his bewildered wife
  The trembling Rupert said;

"Oh Isabel! dost thou not see
  "A shape of horrors here,
"That strains me to its deadly kiss,
  "And keeps me from my dear?"

"No, no, my love! my Rupert, I
  "No shape of horrors see;
"And much I mourn the fantasy
  "That keeps my dear from me."

This night, just like the night before,
  In terrors past away.
Nor did the demon vanish thence
  Before the dawn of day.

Said Rupert then, "My Isabel,
  "Dear partner of my woe.
"To Father Austin's holy cave
  "This instant will I go."

Now Austin was a reverend man,
  Who acted wonders maint--
Whom all the country round believed
  A devil or a saint!

To Father Austin's holy cave
  Then Rupert straightway went;
And told him all, and asked him how
  These horrors to prevent.

The father heard the youth, and then
  Retired awhile to pray:
And, having prayed for half an hour
  Thus to the youth did say:

"There is a place where four roads meet,
  "Which I will tell to thee;
"Be there this eve, at fall of night,
  "And list what thou shalt see.

"Thou'lt see a group of figures pass
  "In strange disordered crowd,
"Travelling by torchlight through the roads,
  "With noises strange and loud.

"And one that's high above the rest,
  "Terrific towering o'er,
"Will make thee know him at a glance,
  "So I need say no more.

"To him from me these tablets give,
  "They'll quick be understood;
"Thou need'st not fear, but give them straight,
  "I've scrawled them with my blood!"

The night-fall came, and Rupert all
  In pale amazement went
To where the cross-roads met, as he
  Was by the Father sent.

And lo! a group of figures came
  In strange disordered crowd.
Travelling by torchlight through the roads,
  With noises strange and loud.

And, as the gloomy train advanced,
  Rupert beheld from far
A female form of wanton mien
  High seated on a car.

And Rupert, as he gazed upon
  The loosely-vested dame,
Thought of the marble statue's look,
  For hers was just the same.

Behind her walked a hideous form,
  With eyeballs flashing death;
Whene'er he breathed, a sulphured smoke
  Came burning in his breath.

He seemed the first of all the crowd,
  Terrific towering o'er;
"Yes, yes," said Rupert, "this is he,
  "And I need ask no more."

Then slow he went, and to this fiend
  The tablets trembling gave,
Who looked and read them with a yell
  That would disturb the grave.

And when he saw the blood-scrawled name,
  His eyes with fury shine;
"I thought," cries he, "his time was out,
  "But he must soon be mine!"

Then darting at the youth a look
  Which rent his soul with fear,
He went unto the female fiend,
  And whispered in her ear.

The female fiend no sooner heard
  Than, with reluctant look,
The very ring that Rupert lost,
  She from her finger took.

And, giving it unto the youth,
  With eyes that breathed of hell,
She said, in that tremendous voice,
  Which he remembered well:

"In Austin's name take back the ring,
  "The ring thou gavest to me;
"And thou'rt to me no longer wed,
  "Nor longer I to thee."

He took the ring, the rabble past.
  He home returned again;
His wife was then the happiest fair,
  The happiest he of men.


[1] I should be sorry to think that my friend had any serious intentions
of frightening the nursery by this story; I rather hope--though the manner
of it leads me to doubt--that his design was to ridicule that distempered
taste which prefers those monsters of the fancy to the _"speciosa
miracula"_ of true poetic imagination.








WRITTEN IN THE BLANK LEAF OF A LADY'S COMMONPLACE BOOK.


Here is one leaf reserved for me,
From all thy sweet memorials free;
And here my simple song might tell
The feelings thou must guess so well.
But could I thus, within thy mind,
One little vacant corner find,
Where no impression yet is seen,
Where no memorial yet hath been,
Oh! it should be my sweetest care
To _write my name_ for ever _there_!









FRAGMENT.


Pity me, love! I'll pity thee,
If thou indeed hast felt like me.
All, all my bosom's peace is o'er!
At night, which _was_ my hour of calm,
When from the page of classic lore,
From the pure fount of ancient lay
My soul has drawn the placid balm,
Which charmed its every grief away,
Ah! there I find that balm no more.
Those spells, which make us oft forget
The fleeting troubles of the day,
In deeper sorrows only whet
The stings they cannot tear away.
When to my pillow racked I fly,
With weary sense and wakeful eye.
While my brain maddens, where, oh, where
Is that serene consoling prayer,
Which once has harbingered my rest,
When the still soothing voice of Heaven
Hath seemed to whisper in my breast,
"Sleep on, thy errors are forgiven!"
No, though I still in semblance pray,
My thoughts are wandering far away,
And even the name of Deity
Is murmured out in sighs for thee.






A NIGHT THOUGHT.


How oft a cloud, with envious veil,
  Obscures yon bashful light,
Which seems so modestly to steal
  Along the waste of night!

'Tis thus the world's obtrusive wrongs
  Obscure with malice keen
Some timid heart, which only longs
  To live and die unseen.






THE KISS.


Grow to my lip, thou sacred kiss,
On which my soul's beloved swore
That there should come a time of bliss,
When she would mock my hopes no more.
And fancy shall thy glow renew,
In sighs at morn, and dreams at night,
And none shall steal thy holy dew
Till thou'rt absolved by rapture's rite.
Sweet hours that are to make me blest,
Fly, swift as breezes, to the goal,
And let my love, my more than soul,
Come blushing to this ardent breast.
Then, while in every glance I drink
The rich overflowing of her mind,
Oh! let her all enamored sink
In sweet abandonment resigned,
Blushing for all our struggles past,
And murmuring, "I am thine at last!"






SONG.


Think on that look whose melting ray
  For one sweet moment mixt with mine,
And for that moment seemed to say,
  "I dare not, or I would be thine!"

Think on thy every smile and glance,
  On all thou hast to charm and move;
And then forgive my bosom's trance,
  Nor tell me it is sin to love.

Oh, _not_ to love thee were the sin;
  For sure, if Fate's decrees be done,
Thou, thou art destined still to win,
  As I am destined to be won!






THE CATALOGUE.


"Come, tell me," says Rosa, as kissing and kist,
  One day she reclined on my breast;
"Come, tell me the number, repeat me the list
  "Of the nymphs you have loved and carest."--
Oh Rosa! 'twas only my fancy that roved,
  My heart at the moment was free;
But I'll tell thee, my girl, how many I've loved,
  And the number shall finish with thee.

My tutor was Kitty; in infancy wild
  She taught me the way to be blest;
She taught me to love her, I loved like a child,
  But Kitty could fancy the rest.
This lesson of dear and enrapturing lore
  I have never forgot, I allow:
I have had it _by rote_ very often before,
  But never _by heart_ until now.

Pretty Martha was next, and my soul was all flame,
  But my head was so full of romance
That I fancied her into some chivalry dame,
  And I was her knight of the lance.
But Martha was not of this fanciful school,
  And she laughed at her poor little knight;
While I thought her a goddess, she thought me a fool,
  And I'll swear _she_ was most in the right.

My soul was now calm, till, by Cloris's looks,
  Again I was tempted to rove;
But Cloris, I found, was so learned in books
  That she gave me more logic than love.
So I left this young Sappho, and hastened to fly
  To those sweeter logicians in bliss,
Who argue the point with a soul-telling eye,
  And convince us at once with a kiss.

Oh! Susan was then all the world unto me,
  But Susan was piously given;
And the worst of it was, we could never agree
  On the road that was shortest to Heaven.
"Oh, Susan!" I've said, in the moments of mirth,
  "What's devotion to thee or to me?
"I devoutly believe there's a heaven on earth,
  "And believe that that heaven's in _thee_!"






IMITATION OF CATULLUS.

TO HIMSELF.


    _Miser Catulle, desinas ineptire_, etc.


Cease the sighing fool to play;
Cease to trifle life away;
Nor vainly think those joys thine own,
Which all, alas, have falsely flown.
What hours, Catullus, once were thine.
How fairly seemed thy day to shine,
When lightly thou didst fly to meet
The girl whose smile was then so sweet--
The girl thou lovedst with fonder pain
Than e'er thy heart can feel again.

  Ye met--your souls seemed all in one,
Like tapers that commingling shone;
Thy heart was warm enough for both,
And hers, in truth, was nothing loath.

  Such were the hours that once were thine;
But, ah! those hours no longer shine.
For now the nymph delights no more
In what she loved so much before;
And all Catullus now can do,
Is to be proud and frigid too;

Nor follow where the wanton flies,
Nor sue the bliss that she denies.
False maid! he bids farewell to thee,
To love, and all love's misery;
The heyday of his heart is o'er,
Nor will he court one favor more.

  Fly, perjured girl!--but whither fly?
Who now will praise thy cheek and eye?
Who now will drink the syren tone,
Which tells him thou art all his own?
Oh, none:--and he who loved before
Can never, never love thee more.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _"Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more_!"
    --ST. JOHN, chap. viii.

Oh woman, if through sinful wile
  Thy soul hath strayed from honor's track,
'Tis mercy only can beguile,
  By gentle ways, the wanderer back.

The stain that on thy virtue lies,
  Washed by those tears, not long will stay;
As clouds that sully morning skies
  May all be wept in showers away.

Go, go, be innocent,--and live;
  The tongues of men may wound thee sore;
But Heaven in pity can forgive,
  And bids thee "go, and sin no more!"






NONSENSE.


Good reader! if you e'er have seen,
  When Phoebus hastens to his pillow,
The mermaids, with their tresses green,
  Dancing upon the western billow:
If you have seen, at twilight dim,
When the lone spirit's vesper hymn
  Floats wild along the winding shore,
If you have seen, through mist of eve,
The fairy train their ringlets weave,
Glancing along the spangled green:--
  If you have seen all this, and more,
God bless me, what a deal you've seen!






EPIGRAM.

FROM THE FRENCH.


"I never gave a kiss (says Prue),
  "To naughty man, for I abhor it."
She will not _give_ a kiss, 'tis true;
  She'll _take_ one though, and thank you for it.








TO ROSA.


    _A far conserva, e cumulo d'amanti.
    "Past. Fid_."


And are you then a thing of art,
  Seducing all, and loving none;
And have I strove to gain a heart
  Which every coxcomb thinks his own?

Tell me at once if this be true,
  And I will calm my jealous breast;
Will learn to join the dangling crew,
  And share your simpers with the rest.

But if your heart be _not_ so free,--
  Oh! if another share that heart,
Tell not the hateful tale to me,
  But mingle mercy with your art.

I'd rather think you "false as hell,"
  Than find you to be all divine,--
Than know that heart could love so well,
  Yet know that heart would not be mine!






TO PHILLIS.


Phillis, you little rosy rake,
  That heart of yours I long to rifle;
Come, give it me, and do not make
  So much ado about a _trifle_!






TO A LADY.

ON HER SINGING.


Thy song has taught my heart to feel
  Those soothing thoughts of heavenly love,
Which o'er the sainted spirits steal
  When listening to the spheres above!

When, tired of life and misery,
  I wish to sigh my latest breath,
Oh, Emma! I will fly to thee,
  And thou shalt sing me into death.

And if along thy lip and cheek
  That smile of heavenly softness play,
Which,--ah! forgive a mind that's weak,--
  So oft has stolen my mind away.

Thou'lt seem an angel of the sky,
  That comes to charm me into bliss:
I'll gaze and die--Who would not die,
  If death were half so sweet as this?






SONG.

ON THE BIRTHDAY OF MRS. ----.

WRITTEN IN IRELAND. 1799.


Of all my happiest hours of joy,
  And even I have had my measure,
When hearts were full, and every eye
  Hath kindled with the light of pleasure,
An hour like this I ne'er was given,
  So full of friendship's purest blisses;
Young Love himself looks down from heaven,
  To smile on such a day as this is.
    Then come, my friends, this hour improve,
      Let's feel as if we ne'er could sever;
And may the birth of her we love
Be thus with joy remembered ever!

Oh! banish every thought to-night,
  Which could disturb our soul's communion;
Abandoned thus to dear delight,
  We'll even for once forget the Union!
On that let statesmen try their powers,
  And tremble o'er the rights they'd die for;
The union of the soul be ours,
  And every union else we sigh for.
    Then come, my friends, etc.

In every eye around I mark
  The feelings of the heart o'er-flowing;
From every soul I catch the spark
  Of sympathy, in friendship glowing.
Oh! could such moments ever fly;
  Oh! that we ne'er were doomed to lose 'em;
And all as bright as Charlotte's eye,
  And all as pure as Charlotte's bosom.
    Then come, my friends, etc.

For me, whate'er my span of years,
  Whatever sun may light my roving;
Whether I waste my life in tears,
  Or live, as now, for mirth and loving;
This day shall come with aspect kind,
  Wherever fate may cast your rover;
He'll think of those he left behind,
  And drink a health to bliss that's over!
    Then come, my friends, etc.






SONG.[1]


Mary, I believed thee true,
  And I was blest in thus believing
But now I mourn that e'er I knew
  A girl so fair and so deceiving.
    Fare thee well.

Few have ever loved like me,--
  Yes, I have loved thee too sincerely!
And few have e'er deceived like thee.--
  Alas! deceived me too severely.

Fare thee well!--yet think awhile
  On one whose bosom bleeds to doubt thee:
Who now would rather trust that smile,
  And die with thee than live without thee.

Fare thee well! I'll think of thee.
  Thou leavest me many a bitter token;
For see, distracting woman, see,
  My peace is gone, my heart is broken!--
    Fare thee well!


[1] These words were written to the pathetic Scotch air "Galla Water."






MORALITY.

A FAMILIAR EPISTLE.

ADDRESSED TO J. ATKINSON, ESQ. M. R. I. A.


Though long at school and college dozing.
O'er books of verse and books of prosing,
And copying from their moral pages
Fine recipes for making sages;
Though long with' those divines at school,
Who think to make us good by rule;
Who, in methodic forms advancing,
Teaching morality like dancing,
Tell us, for Heaven or money's sake.
What _steps_ we are through life to take:
Though thus, my friend, so long employed,
With so much midnight oil destroyed,
I must confess my searches past,
I've only learned _to doubt_ at last
I find the doctors and the sages
Have differed in all climes and ages,
And two in fifty scarce agree
On what is pure morality.
'Tis like the rainbow's shifting zone,
And every vision makes its own.

  The doctors of the Porch advise,
As modes of being great and wise,
That we should cease to own or know
The luxuries that from feeling flow;
"Reason alone must claim direction,
"And Apathy's the soul's perfection.
"Like a dull lake the heart must lie;
"Nor passion's gale nor pleasure's sigh,
"Though Heaven the breeze, the breath, supplied,
"Must curl the wave or swell the tide!"

  Such was the rigid Zeno's plan
To form his philosophic man;
Such were the modes _he_ taught mankind
To weed the garden of the mind;
They tore from thence some weeds, 'tis true,
But all the flowers were ravaged too!

  Now listen to the wily strains,
Which, on Cyrene's sandy plains,
When Pleasure, nymph with loosened zone,
Usurped the philosophic throne,--
Hear what the courtly sage's[1] tongue
To his surrounding pupils sung:--
"Pleasure's the only noble end
"To which all human powers should tend,
"And Virtue gives her heavenly lore,
"But to make Pleasure please us more.
"Wisdom and she were both designed
"To make the senses more refined,
"That man might revel, free from cloying,
"Then most a sage when most enjoying!"

  Is this morality?--Oh, no!
Even I a wiser path could show.
The flower within this vase confined,
The pure, the unfading flower of mind,
Must not throw all its sweets away
Upon a mortal mould of clay;
No, no,--its richest breath should rise
In virtue's incense to the skies.

  But thus it is, all sects we see
Have watchwords of morality:
Some cry out Venus, others Jove;
Here 'tis Religion, there 'tis Love.
But while they thus so widely wander,
While mystics dream and doctors ponder:
And some, in dialectics firm,
Seek virtue in a middle term;
While thus they strive, in Heaven's defiance,
To chain morality with science;
The plain good man, whose action teach
More virtue than a sect can preach
Pursues his course, unsagely blest
His tutor whispering in his breast;
Nor could he act a purer part,
Though he had Tully all by heart.
And when he drops the tear on woe,
He little knows or cares to know
That Epictetus blamed that tear,
By Heaven approved, to virtue dear!

  Oh! when I've seen the morning beam
Floating within the dimpled stream;
While Nature, wakening from the night,
Has just put on her robes of light,
Have I, with cold optician's gaze,
Explored the _doctrine_ of those rays?
No, pedants, I have left to you
Nicely to separate hue from hue.
Go, give that moment up to art,
When Heaven and nature claim the heart;
And, dull to all their best attraction,
Go--measure _angles of refraction_.
While I, in feeling's sweet romance,
Look on each daybeam as a glance
From the great eye of Him above,
Wakening his world with looks of love!


[1] Aristippus.







το
MRS.—
If, in the dream that hovers
Around my sleeping mind,
Fancy thy form discovers,
And paints thee melting kind;
If joys from sleep I borrow,
Sure thou ’It forgive me this;
For he who wakes to sorrow,
At least may dream of bliss!
Oh ! if thou art, in seeming,
All that I Ve e’er requir’d;
Oh ! if I feel, in dreaming,
All that I’ve e’er desir’d;
Wilt thou forgive my taking
A kiss, or------something more ?
What thou deny’st me waking,
Oh! let me slumber o’er!






TO
JULIA.
Well, Julia, if to love, and live
’Mid all the pleasures love can give,
Be crimes that bring damnation ;
You—you and I have giv’n such scope
To loves and joys, we scarce can hope,
In heav’n, the least salvation !
And yet, I think, did Heav’n design
That blisses dear, like yours and mine,
Should be our own undoing;
It had not made my soul so warm,
Nor giv’n you such a witching form,
To bid me dote on ruin !
Then wipe away that tintid tear,
Sweet truant! you have nought to fear,
Though you were whelm'd in sin;
Stand but at heaven’s gate awhile,
And you so like an angel smile,
They can’t but let you in.






SONG.
SWEET seducer! blandly smiling,
Charming still, and etill beguiling I
Oft I swore to love thee never,
Yet I love thee more tnan ever 1
Why that little wanton blushing,
Glancing eye, and bosom flushing ?
Flushing warm, and wily glancing,
All is lovely, all entrancing!
Turn away those lips of blisses—
I am poison’d by thy kisses !
Yet, again, ah ! turn them to me:
Ruin’s sweet, when they undo me I
Oh! be less, be less enchanting,
Let some little grace be wanting;
Let my eyes, when I’m expiring,
Gaze awhile, without admiring!







SONG.
Why, the world are all thinking about it,
And as for myself, I can swear,
If I fancied that heav’n were without it,
I’d scarce feel a wish to go there*
If Mahomet would but receive-me,
And Paradise be as he paints;
I *m greatly afraid, God forgive me!
I’d worship, the eyes of his saints·
But why should I think of a trip
To the Prophet’s seraglio above,
When Phillida gives me her lip,
As my own little heaven of love!
Oh! Phyllis, that kiss may be sweeter
Than ever by mortal was given;
But your lip, love, is only St. Peter,
And keeps but the key to your heaven !







IMPROMPTU.
Look in my eyes, my blushing fair!
Thou ’It see thyself reflected there,
And as I gaze on thine, I see
Two little miniatures of me.
Thus in our looks some propagation lies,
For we make babies in each other’s eyes!







PIETY.
Sue, the pretty nun,
Prays with warm emotion;
Sweetly rolls her eyes
In love or in devotion!
If her pious heart
Softens to relieve you,
She gently shares the fault
With, “ Oh! may God forgive you !"





TO
MRS.------------
---------amore
In canuti pensier si disconvcne. Guariki.
YES, I think I once heard of an amorous youth
Who was caught in his. grandmother’s bed;
But I own I had ne’er such a liquorish tooth
As to wish to be there in his stead.
'T is for you, my dear Madam, such conquests to make^
Antiquarians may value you high,
But, I swear, I can’t love for antiquity’s sake.
Such a poor virtuoso am I.
I have seen many ruins all gilded with care,
But the cracks were still plain to the eye;
And I ne’er felt a passion to venture in there,
But ttirn’d up my nose, and pass’d by!
I perhaps might have sigh'd in your magical chain,
When your lip had more freshness to deck it;
But I’d hate even Dian herself in the wane
She might then go to hell for a Hecate 
No, no ! when my heart *s in these amorous faints,
Which is seldom, thank Heaven ! the case;
For by reading the Fathers and Lives of the Saints,
I keep up a stock of good grace.
But theu’t is the creature, luxuriant and fresh,
That my passion with ecstacy owns;
For indeed, my dear Madam, though fond of the fleshy
I never was partial to bones !






TO
JULIA.
Sweet is the dream, divinely sweet,
When absent souls in fancy meet!
At midnight, love! I ’11 think of thee;
At midnight, love! oh! think of me;
Think that thou giv’st thy dearest kiss,
And I will think I feel the bliss.
Then, if thou blush, that blush be mine,
And if I weep, the tear be thine!





TO
Can I again that form caress,
Or on that lip in rapture twine ?
No, no! the lip that all may press
Shall never more be press’d by mine·
Can I again that look recall,
Which once could make me die for thee ?
No, no! the eye that burns on all
Shall never more be priz’d by me!










SONG.
Away with this pouting and sadness,
Sweet girl! will you never give o’er ?
I love you, by Heaven ! to madness,
And what can I swear to you more ?  ,
Believe not the old women’s fable,
That oaths are as short as a kiss;
IΊ1 love you as long as I’m able,
And swear for no longer than this.
Then waste not the time with professions,
For not to be blest when we can
Is one of the darkest trangressions
That happen ’twixt woman and man.
Pretty moralist! why thus beginning
My innocent warmth to reprove ?
Heav’n knows that I never lov'd sinning—
Except little sinnings in love !
If swearing, however, will do it,
Come, bring me the calendar, pray—
I vow, by that lip, I’11 go through it,
And not miss a saint on my way.
The angels shall help me to wheedle,
I'll swear upon every one
That e’er danc’d on the point of a needle *,
Or rode on a beam of the sun !
Oh ! why should Platonic control, love,
t Enchain an emotion so free?
Your soul, though a very sweet soul, love,
Will ne’er be sufficient for me.
If you think, by this coldness and scorning,
To seem more angelic and bright,
Be an angel, my love, in the morning,
But, oh ! be a woman to-night!
* I believe Mr. Little alluded here to a famous question
among the early schoolmen: “ How many thousand angels
“ could dance on the point of a very fine needle, without joet-
(t ling one another V* If he could have been thinking of the
schools, while he was writing this song, we cannot say
t( canit indoctum ” E.







AN ARGUMENT
TO ANY
PHILLIS or CHLOE.
I'VE oft been told by learned friars,
That wishing and the crime are one, ,
And Heaven punishes desires
As much as if the deed were done·
If wishing damns us, you and I
Are damn’d to all our heart’s content;
Come, then, at least we may enjoy
Some pleasure for our punishment!







THE KISS.
Hla nisi in lecto nusquam potuere doceri.
Ovid, L'tb. is, EUg. 5.
GIVE me, my love, that billing kiss,
I taught you one delicious night,
When, turning epicures in bliss,
We tried inventions of delight.
Come, gently steal my lips along,
And let your lips in murmurs move.—
Ah ! no—again—that kiss was wrong,—
How can you be so dull, my love?
“ Cease, cease !” the blushing girl replied,
And in her milky arms she caught me—
u How can you thus your pupil chide ?
“ You know V was in the dark you taught me I”







LOVE IN A STORM.
Quam juvat immites ventos audire cubantem,
Et dominam tenero continuisse sinu.
Tibullus.
LoUD sung the wind in the ruins above,
Which murmur’d the warnings of Time o’er our
head;
While fearless we offer’d devotions to love,
The rude rock our pillow, the rushes our bed!
Damp was the chill of the wintery air,
But it made us cling closer, and warmly unite j
Dread was the lightning, and horrid its glare,
But it show’d me my Julia in languid delight·
To my bosom she nestled, and felt not a fear,
Though the shower did beat, and the tempest did
frown;
Her sighs were as sweet, and her murmurs as dear,
As if she lay lull’d on a pillow of down!





SONG.
Jessy on a bank was sleeping,
A flow’r beneath her bosom lay;
Love, upon her slumber creeping,
Stole the flow’r, and flew away!
Pity, then, poor Jessy’s ruin,
Who, becalm’d by slumber’s wing,
Never felt what Love was doing—
Never dream’d of such a thing!





TO
A SLEEPING MAID.
Wake, my life! thy lover’s arms
Are twin’d around thy sleeping charms;
Wake, my love, and let desire
Kindle those opening orbs of fire.
Yet, sweetest, though the bliss delight thee,
If the guilt, the shame affright thee,
Still those orbs in darkness keep;
Sleep, my girl, or seem to sleep.





SONG.
When the heart’s feeling
Burns with concealing,
Glances will tell what we fear to confess:
Oh! what an anguish
Silent to languish.
Could we not look all we wish to express!
When half-expiring,
Restless, desiring,
Lovers wish something, but must not say what,
Looks tell the wanting,
Looks tell the granting,
Looks betray all that the heart would be at.






A BALLAD*.
Thou hast sent me a flowery band,
And told me’t was fresh from the field;
That the leaves were untouch’d by the hand,
And the purest of odours would yield.
And indeed it is fragrant and fair;
But, if it were handled by thee,
It would bloom with a livelier air,
And would surely be sweeter to me1
Then take it, and let it entwine
Thy tresses, so flowing and bright;
And each little flowret will shine
More rich than a gem to my sight.
* This ballad was probably suggested by the following epi-
gram in Martial:
Intactas quare mittis mihi, Polla, coronas,
A te vexatas malo tenere rosas. Epig. xc. Lib. x i.
Editor.
Let the odorous gale of thy breath
Embalm it with many a sigh;
Nay, let it be wither’d to death
Beneath the warm noon of thine eye.
And, instead of the dew that it bears,
The dew dropping fresh from the tree;
On its leaves let me number the tears
That Affection has stolen from thee!






WRITTEN IN THE SAME.
TO THE
PRETTY LITTLE MRS;
IMPROMPTU.
This journal of folly's an emblem of me,
But what book shall we find emblematic of thee ?
Oh ! shall we not say thou art Love's duodecimo ?
None can be prettier, few can be less, you know.
Such a volume in sheets were a volume of charms;
Or if bound, it should only be bound in our arms !






FANNY OF TIMMOL.
A MAIL-COACH ADVENTURE.
Quadrigis petimus bene vivere. Horace·
jS WEET Fanny of Timmol! when first you came in
To the close little carriage in which I was hurl’d,
I thought to myself, if it were not a sin,
I could teach you the prettiest tricks in the world·
For your dear little lips, to their destiny true,
Seem’d to know they were born for the use of
another;
And to put me in mind of what I ought to do,
Were eternally biting and kissing each other!
And then you were darting from eyelids so sly,
Half open, half shutting, such tremulous light:
Let them say what they will, I could read in your eye
More comical things than I ever shall write.
And oft as we mingled our legs and our feet,
I felt a pulsation, and cannot tell whether
In yours or in mine—but I know it was sweet,
And I think we both felt it and trembled together I
At length when arriv’d at our supper we sat,
I heard with a sigh, which had something of pain,
That perhaps our last moment of meeting was that,
And Fanny should go back to Timmol again.
Yet I swore not that I was in love with you, Fanny,.
Oh ! no, for I felt it could never be true;
I but said what I’ve said very often to many—
There’s few I would rather be kissing than you!
Then first did I learn that you/once had believ’d
Some lover, the dearest and falsest of men ;
And so gently you spoke of the youth who deceiv’d,
That I thought you perhaps might be tempted again·
But you told me, that passion a moment amus’d
Was follow’d too oft by an age of repenting;
And check’d me so softly, that, while you refus’d,
Forgive me, dear girl, if I thought’t was consenting!
And still I entreated, and still you denied,
Till I almost was made to believe you sincere;
Though I found that, in bidding me leave you, you
sigh’d,
* And when you repuls’d me, ’t was done with a tear!
In vain did I whisper “ There’s nobody nigh
In vain with the tremors of passion implore;
Your excuse was a kiss, and a tear your reply—
I acknowledg’d them both, and I ask’d for no more.
Was I right ?—oh ! I cannot believe I was wrong;
Poor Fanny is gone back to Timmol again,
And may Providence guide her uninjur’d along,^
Nor scatter her path with repentance and pain.
By Heav’n ! I would rather for ever forswear
The elysium that dwells on a beautiful breast,
Than alarm for a moment the peace that is there,
Or banish the dove from so hallow’d a nest!








ELEGIAC STANZAS.
Sic juvat perire.
When wearied wretches sink to sleep,
How heavenly soft their slumbers lie!
How sweet is death to those who weep,
To those who weep and long to die!
Saw you the soft and grassy bed,
Where flowrets deck the green earth’s breast ?
*T is there I wish to lay my head,
*T is there I wish to sleep at rest!
Oh ! let not tears embalm my tomb,
None but the dews by twilight given!
Oh! let not sighs disturb the gloom,
None but the whispering winds of heaven!






AN INVITATION TO SUPPER.
TO
MRS-------
Myself, dear Julia, and the sun
Have now two years of rambling run,
And he before his wheels has driven
The grand menagerie of Heaven;
While I have met on earth, I swear,
As many brutes as he has there;
The only difference I can see
Betwixt the flaming god and me,
Is, that his ways are periodic,
And mine, I fear, are simply oddic.
But, dearest girl, ’t is now a lapse
Of two short years, or less perhaps,
Since you to me, and I to you,
Vow’d to be ever fondly true!
Ah ! Julia, those were pleasant times t
You lov'd me for my amorous rhymes;
And I lov’d you because I thought
’T was so delicious to be taught
By such a charming guide as you,
With eyes.of fire and lips of dew,
All I had often fancied o'er,
But never, never felt before;
The day flew by, and night was short
For half our blisses, half our sport!
I know pot how we chang’d, or why,
Or if the first was you or I;
Yet so *t is now, we meet each other,
And I *m no more than Julia's brother,
While she’s so like my prudent sister,
There’s few would think how close I’ve kist her.
But, Julia, let those matters pass,
If you will brim a sparkling glass
To vanish'd hours of true delight,
Come to me after dusk to-night.
I '11 have no other guest to meet you,
But here alone I '11 tite-b-tite you
Over a little attic feast,
As full of cardial soul, at least,
As those where Delia met Tibullus,
Or Lesbia wanton’d with Catullus *.
I '11 sing you many a roguish sonnet
About it, at it, and upon it;
And songs, address’d as if I lov’d,
To all the girls with whom I’ve rov’d.
Come, pr’y thee come, you ’11 find me here,
Like Horace, waiting for his dear f.
There shall not be to-night, on earth,
Two souls more elegant in mirth;
And though our hey-day passion’s fled,  ~
The spirit of the love that ’s dead >
Shall hover wanton o’er our head, J
Like souls that round the grave will fly,
Jn which their late possessors lie;
* Coenam, non sine candicU pueltt.
Catullus, Carm.xui.
t ---------puellam
Ad mediam noctem exgecto. Horace, Lib. n Sat.$.
And who, my pretty Julia, knows,
But when our warm remembrance glows,
The ghost of Love may act anew,
What Love when living us’d to do!








AN
ODE UPON MORNING.
Turn to me, love! the morning rays
Are glowing o’er thy languid charms;
Take one luxurious, parting gaze,
While yet I linger in thine arms.
.’T was long before the noon of night
I stole into thy bosom, dear!
And now the glance of dawning light
Has found me still in dalliance here.
Turn to me, love! the trembling gleams
Of morn along thy white neck stray;
Away, away, you envious beams,
IΊ1 chase you. with my lips away !
Oh! is it not divine to think,
While all around were lull’d in night,
While even the planets seem’d to wink,
We kept our vigils of delight!
The heart, that little world of ours,
Unlike the drowsy world of care,
Then, then awak'd its sweetest pow’rS,
And all was animation there !
Kiss me once more, and then I fly,
Our parting would to noon-day last;
There close that languid, trembling eye,
And sweetly dream of all the past!
As soon as night shall fix her seal
Upon the eyes and lips of men,
Oh, dearest! I will panting steal
To nestle in thine arms again !
Our joys shall take their stolen flight,
Secret as those celestial spheres
Which make sweet music all the night
Unheard by drowsy mortal ears!







SONG*.
UH! nothing in life can sadden us
While we have wiue and good humour in store;
With this, and a little of love to madden us, ,
Show me the fool that can labour for more!
Come then, bid Ganymede fill every bowl for you,
Fill them upr brimmers and drink as I call;
I'm going to toast every nymph of my soul for you,
Ay, on my soul, 1 'm in love with them all!
Dear creatures ! we can't live without them,
They 're all that is sweet and seducing to man;
Looking, sighing about* and about them,
We doat on them, die for them, all that we can.
* There are many spurious copies of this song in circula-
tion, and it is universally attributed to a gentleman who has
no more right than the Editor of these Poems to any share
"whatever in the composition. E.
Here’s Phillis, whose innocent bosom
Is always agog for some novel desires;
To-day to get lovers, to-morrow to lose ’em,
Is all that the innocent Phillis requires.
Here’s to the gay little Jessy, who simpers
So vastly good humour’d, whatever is done;
She ’11 kiss you, and that without whining or whim-
pers,
And do what you please with you—all out of fun !
Dear creatures, &c.
A bumper to Fanny—I know you will scorn her,
Because she *s a prude, and her nose is so curl’d;
But if ever you chatted with Fan in a corner,
You’d say she *s the best little girl in the world !
Another to Lyddy, still struggling with duty,
And asking her conscience still, “ whether she
should
While her eyes, in the silent confession of beauty,
Say “ Only for something I certainly would!”
Dear creatures, &c.
Fill for Chloe, bewitchingly simple,
Who angles the heart without knowing her lure;
Still wounding around with a blush or a dimple,
Nor seeming to feel that she also could cure !
Here’s pious Susan, the saint, who alone, Sir,
Could ever have made me religious outright;
For had I such a dear little saint of my own, Sir,
I'd pray on my knees to her half the long night!
Dear creatures, &c.







SONG*.
SwEETEST love ! I Ί1 not forget thee^
Time shall only teach my heart,
Fonder, warmer to regret thee,
Lovely, gentle as thou art!
Farewell Bessy!
Yet, oh! yet again we *11 meet, love,
And repose our hearts at last;
Oh! sure 't will then be sweet, love,
Calm to think on sorrows past.
Farewell Bessy!
* All these songs were adapted to airs which Mr. Little
composed, and sometimes sang for his friends: this may ac-
count for the peculiarity of metre observable in many of them.
Editor.
Yes, my girl, the distant blessing
May n’t be always sought in vain;
And the moment of possessing—
Will it not, love, repay our pain ?
Farewell Bessy!
Still I feel my heart is breaking,
When I think I stray from thee,
Round the world that quiet seeking,
Which I fear is not for me!
Farewell Bessy!
*
Calm to peace thy lover’s bosom—
Can it, dearest, must it be?
Thou within an hour shalt lose him,
He for ever loses thee!
Farewell Bessy !







JULIA’S KISS.
When infant Bliss in roses slepty
Cupid upon his slumber crept,
And white a balmy sigh he stole
Exhaling from the infant’s soul,
He smiling said, “ With this, with this
"I'll scent my Julia’s burning kiss!”
Nay more, he stole to Venus' bed,
Ere yet the sanguine flush had fled,
Which Love’s divinest, dearest flame
Had kindled through her panting frame.
Her soul still dwelt on memory’s themes,
Still floated in voluptuous dreams,
And every joy she felt before
In slumber now was acting o’er.
From her ripe lips, which seem’d to thrill
As in the war of kisses still,
And amorous to each other clung,
He stole the dew that trembling hung,
And smiling said, “ With this, with this
“ I ’11 bathe my Julia’s burning kiss!”





SONG.
* A CAPTIVE thus to thee, my girl,
How sweetly shall I pass my age.
Contented, like the playful squirrel,
To wanton up and down my cage.
When death shall envy joy like this,
And come to shade our sunny weather,
Be our last sigh the sigh of bliss,
And both our souls exhal’d together!







A FRAGMENT.
to ——.
T IS night, the spectred hour is nigh ;
Pensive I hear the moaning blast
Passing, with sad sepulchral sigh,
My lyre that hangs neglected by,
And seems to mourn for pleasures past!
That lyre was once attun’d for thee,
To many a lay of fond delight,
When all thy days were giv’n to me,
And mine was every blissful night.
How oft I ’ve languish’d by thy side,
And while my heart’s luxuriant tide
Ran in wild riot through my veins,
I ’ve wak’d such sweetly-mad’ning strains,
As if by inspiration’s fire
My soul was blended with my lyre!
Oh ! while in every fainting note
We heard the soul of passion float;
While, in thy blue dissolving glance,
I ’ve raptur’d read thy bosom’s trance,
I *ve sung and trembled, kiss’d and sung,
Till, as we mingle breath with breath,
Thy burning kisses parch my tongue,
My hands drop listless on the lyre,
And, murmuring like a swan in death,
Upon thy bosom I expire!
Yes, I indeed remember well
Those hours of pleasure past and o’er;
Why have I liv’d their sweets to tell,
To tell, but never feel them more!
I should have died, have sweetly died,
In one of those impassion’d dreams,
When languid, silent on thy breast,
Drinking thine eyes’ delicious beams,
My soul has flutter’d from its nest,
And on thy lip just parting sigh’d!
Oh ! dying thus a death of love,
To heav’n how dearly should I go !
He well might hope for joys above,
Who had begun them here below !
******
* * * * *






SONG.
Where is the nymph, whose azure eye
Can shine through rapture’s tear ?
The sun has sunk, the moon is high,
And yet she comes not here!
Was that her footstep on the hill,
Her voice upon the gale ?
No, ’t was the wind, and all is still,
Oh, Maid of Marlivale!
Come to me, love, I’ve wander’d for,
*T is past the promis’d hour;
Come to me, love, the twilight star
Shall guide thee to my bower.