TO
EDWARD TUITE DALTON. ESQ.
THIS FIRST NUMBER
OF
SACRED SONGS
18 INSCRIBED,
BT HIS SINCERE AND AFFECTIONATE FRIEND,
THOMAS MOORE.
Mayfield Cottage, Ashbourne,
Mag, 1816.

SACRED SONGS.
THOU ART, O GOD.
(Air. — Unknown.*)
“ The day is thine; the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the light
and the sun.
“ Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer
and winter.” — Psalm lxxiv. 16,17.
Thou art, O God, the life and light
Of all this wondrous world we see;
Its glow by day, its smile by night,
Are but reflections caught from Thee.
Where’er we turn, thy glories shine,
And all things fair and bright are Thine!
•	I have heard that this air is by the late Mrs. Sheridan.
It is sung to the beautiful old words, “ I do confess thou’rt
smooth and fair.**
When Day, with farewell beam, delays
Among the opening clouds of Even,
And we can almost think we gaze
Through golden vistas into Heaven —
Those hues, that make the Sun’s decline
So soft, so radiant, Lord ! are Thine.
When Night, with wings of starry gloom,
O’ershadows all the earth and skies,
Like some dark, beauteous bird, whose plume
Is sparkling with unnumber’d eyes —
That sacred gloom, those fires divine,
So grand, so countless, Lord ! are Thine.
When youthful Spring around us breathes,
Thy Spirit warms her fragrant sigh ;
And every flower the Summer wreathes
Is born beneath that kindling eye.
Where’er we turn, thy glories shine,
And all things fair and bright are Thine·
THE BIRD, LET LOOSE.
(Anu — Beethoven. )
The bird, let loose in eastern skies ·,
When hastening fondly home,
Ne’er stoops to earth her wing, nor flies
Where idle warblers roam.
But high she shoots through air and light,
Above all low delay,
Where nothing earthly bounds her flight,
Nor shadow dims her way.
So grant me, God, from every care
And stain of passion free,
Aloft, through Virtue’s purer air,
To hold my course to Thee!
*	The carrier-pigeon, it is well known, flies at an elevated
pitch, in order to surmount every obstacle between her and the
place to which she is destined.
No sin to cloud, no lure to stay
My Soul, as home she springs; —
Thy Sunshine on her joyful way,
Thy Freedom in her wings 

FALLEN IS THY THRONE.
(Air. — Martini. )
Fali/n is thy Throne, oh Israel!
Silence is o’er thy plains;
Thy dwellings all lie desolate,
Thy children weep in chains.
Where are the dews that fed thee
On Etham’s barren shore ?
That fire from Heaven which led thee,	
Now lights thy path no more.	
Lord ! thou didst love Jerusalem —
Once she was all thy own;
Her love thy fairest heritage *,
Her power thy glory’s throne f .

•	“ I have left mine heritage; I have given the dearly-	
beloved of my soul into the hands of her enemies.” — Jeremiah,
xiL 7.
f “ Do not disgrace the throne of thy glory.**—Jer, xiv. 21.	

Till evil came, and blighted
Thy long-lov’d olive-tree *; —
And Salem’s shrines were lighted
For other gods than Thee.
Then sunk the star of Solyma —
Then pass’d her glory’s day,
Like heath that, in the wilderness f,
The wild wind whirls away.
Silent and waste her bowers,
Where once the mighty trod,
And sunk those guilty towers,
While Baal reign’d as God.
“ Go” — said the Lord — “ Ye Conquerors!
<f Steep in her blood your swords,
“ And raze to earth her battlements
“ For they are not the Lord’s.
*	“ The Lord called thy name a green olive-tree; fair and
of goodly fruit,” &c. —Jer. xi. 16.
+ “ For he shall be like the heath in the desert.** — Jer.
xvii. 6.
X “ Take away her battlements ; for they are not the
Lord’s.’*—Jer. v. 10.
“ Till Zion’s mournful daughter
“ O’er kindred bones shall tread,
“ And Hinnom’s vale of slaughter *
“ Shall hide but half her dead ! ”
*	“ Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lokd, that
it shall no more be called Tophet, nor the Valley of the Son
of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter', for they shall bury	
in Tophet till there be no place·*’— Jer vii. 32.	
WHO IS THE MAID ?
st. jerome’s love.*
(Ant. — Beethoven. )
Who is the Maid my spirit seeks,
Through cold reproof and slander’s blight ?
Has she Love’s roses on her cheeks ?
Is hers an eye of this world’s light ?
No — wan and sunk with midnight prayer
Are the pale looks of her I love;
Or if, at times, a light be there,
Its beam is kindled from above.
•	These lines were suggested by a passage in one of St.
Jerome’s Letters, replying to some calumnious remarks that
had been circulated respecting his intimacy with the matron
Paula: — ·* Numquid me vestes sericae, nitentes gemmae, picta
facies, aut auri rapuit ambitio? Nulla fuit alia Romae matro-
narum, quae meam possit edomare mentem, nisi lugens atque
jejunans, fletu pene caecata.” — Epist. “ Si tibi putem.**
I chose not her, my heart’s elect,
From those who seek their Maker’s shrine
In gems and garlands proudly deck’d,
As if themselves were things divine.
No — Heaven but faintly warms the breast
That beats beneath a broider’d veil;
And she who comes in glittering vest
To mourn her frailty, still is frail.*
Not so the faded form I prize
And love, because its bloom is gone ,
The glory in those sainted eyes
Is all the grace her brow puts on.
And ne’er was Beauty’s dawn so bright,
So touching as that form’s decay,
Which, like the altar’s trembling light,
In holy lustre wastes away.
*	Ου yap κρυσοφορ*ιν την $ακρυουσαν fcu — Chrytott.
Homil. 8. in Epist. ad Tim.
THIS WORLD IS ALL A FLEETING SHOW.
(Air. — Stevenson.)
This world is all a fleeting show,
For man’s illusion given ;
The smiles of Joy, the tears of Woe,
Deceitful shine, deceitful flow —
There’s nothing true but Heaven !
And false the light on Glory’s plume,
As fading hues of Even ;
And Love and Hope, and Beauty’s bloom,
Are blossoms gather’d for the tomb —
There’s nothing bright but Heaven !
Poor wanderers of a stormy day,
From wave to wave we’re driven,
And Fancy’s flash, and Reason’s ray,
Serve but to light the troubled way —
There’s nothing calm but Heaven!
OH THOU WHO DRY*ST THE MOURNER’S
TEAR.
(Air. — Haydn.)
** He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.” —
Psalm cxlrii. 3.
Oh Thou who dry’st the mourner’s tear,
How dark this world would be,
If, when deceived and wounded here,
We could not fly to Thee.
The friends who in our sunshine live,
When winter comes, are flown;
And he who has but tears to give,
Must weep those tears alone.
But Thou wilt heal that broken heart,
Which, like the plants that throw
Their fragrance from the wounded part,
Breathes sweetness out of woe.
When joy no longer soothes or cheers,
And even the hope that threw
A moment’s sparkle o’er our tears,
Is dimm’d and vanish’d too,
Oh, who would bear life’s stormy doom,
Did not thy Wing of Love
Come, brightly wafting through the gloom
Our Peace-branch from above ?
Then sorrow, touch’d by Thee, grows bright
With more than rapture’s ray;
As darkness shows us worlds of light
We never saw by day!
WEEP NOT FOR THOSE.
(Air.—Avison. )
Weep not for those whom the veil of the tomb,
In life’s happy morning, hath hid from our eyes,
Ere sin threw a blight o’er the spirit’s young bloom,
Or earth had profaned what was born for the
skies.
Death chill’d the fair fountain, ere sorrow had stain’d
it;
’Twas frozen in all the pure light of its course,
And but sleeps till the sunshine of Heaven has
unchain’d it,
To water that Eden where first was its source.
Weep not for those whom the veil of the tomb,
In life’s happy morning, hath hid from our eyes,
Ere sin threw a blight o’er the spirit’s young bloom,
Or earth had profaned what was born for the
skies.
Mourn not for her, the young Bride of the Vale*,
Our gayest and loveliest, lost to us now,
Ere life’s early lustre had time to grow pale,
And the garland of Love was yet fresh on her
brow.
Oh, then was her moment, dear spirit, for flying
From this gloomy world, while its gloom was
unknown —
And the wild hymns she warbled so sweetly, in dying,
Were echoed in Heaven by lips like her own.
Weep not for her—in her spring-time she flew
To that land where the wings of the soul are
unfurl'd;
And now, like a star beyond evening’s cold dew,
Looks radiantly down on the tears of this world.
*	This second verse, which I wrote long after the first, al-
ludes to the fate of a very lovely and amiable girl, the daughter
of the late Colonel Bainbrigge, who was married in Ashbourne
church, October 31. 1815, and died of a fever in a few weeks
after: the sound of her marriage-bells seemed scarcely out of
our ears when we heard of her death. During her last deli-
rium she sung several hymns, in a voice even clearer and
sweeter than usual, and among them were some from the
present collection, (particularly, “ There’s nothing bright but
Heaven,”) which this very interesting girl had often heard
me sing during the summer.
THE TURF SHALL BE MY FRAGRANT
SHRINE.
( A in. — Stevenson. )
The turf shall be my fragrant shrine;
My temple, Lord ! that Arch of thine;
My censer’s breath the mountain airs,
And silent thoughts my only prayers.*
My choir shall be the moonlight waves,
When murmuring homeward to their caves,
Or when the stillness of the sea,
Even more than music, breathes of Thee!
I’ll seek, by day, some glade unknown,
All light and silence, like thy Throne;
And the pale stars shall be, at night,
The only eyes that watch my rite.
•	Pii orant tacite.
Thy Heaven, on which ’tis bliss to look,
Shall be my pure and shining book,
Where I shall read, in words of flame,
The glories of thy wondrous name.
I'll read thy anger in the rack
That clouds awhile the day-beam’s track;
Thy mercy in the azure hue
Of sunny brightness, breaking through.
There’s nothing bright, above, below,
From flowers that bloom to stars that glow,
But in its light my soul can see
Some feature of thy Deity:
There’s nothing dark, below, above,
But in its gloom I trace thy Love,
And meekly wait that moment, when
Thy touch shall turn all bright again!
SOUND THE LOUD TIMBREL.
miriam’s song.
( Air. — Avison.·)
“ And Miriam, the Prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in
her hand ; and all the women went out after her, with timbrels and with
dances.” — Exod xv 20.
Sound the loud Timbrel o’er Egypt’s dark sea!
Jehovah has triumph’d — his people are free.	
Sing — for the pride of the Tyrant is broken,
His chariots, his horsemen, all splendid and
brave —	;
How vain was their boast, for the Lord hath but
spoken,	
And chariots and horsemen are sunk in the wave.
Sound the loud Timbrel o’er Egypt’s dark sea;
Jehovah has triumph’d — his people are free.
•	I have so much altered the character of	this	air,	which	is	
from the beginning of one of Avison’s old-fashioned concertos,
that, without this acknowledgment,	it could hardly,	I	think,	
be recognized.	
Praise to the Conqueror, praise to the Lord 
His word was our arrow, his breath was our
sword. —
Who shall return to tell Egypt the story
Of those she sent forth in the hour of her pride ?
For the Lord hath look’d out from his pillar of
glory *,
And all her brave thousands are dash’d in the
tide.
Sound the loud Timbrel o’er Egypt’s dark sea,
Jehovah has triumph’d — his people are free!
*	“ And it came to pass, that, in the morning watch, the
Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar
of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyp-
tians.”— Exod. xiv. 24.
GO, LET ME WEEP.
(Air. — Stevenson.)
Go, let me weep — there’s bliss in tears,
When he who sheds them inly feels
Some lingering stain of early years
Effaced by every drop that steals.
The fruitless showers of worldly woe
Fall dark to earth and never rise;
While tears that from repentance flow,
In bright exhalement reach the skies.
Go, let me weep.
Leave me to sigh o’er hours that flew
More idly than the summer’s wind,
And, while they pass’d, a fragrance threw,
But left no trace of sweets behind. —
The warmest sigh that pleasure heaves
Is cold, is faint to those that swell
The heart, where pure repentance grieves
O’er hours of pleasure, loved too well.
Leave me to sigh.
COME NOT, OH LORD.
(Air. — Haydn.)	

Come not, oh Lord, in the dread robe of splendour
Thou worst on the Mount, in the day of thine
ire;	!
Come veil'd in those shadows, deep, awful, but ten-
der,
Which Mercy flings over thy features of fire 
Lord, thou rememb’rest the night, when thy 
Nation *
Stood fronting her Foe by the red-rolling stream;
O’er Egypt thy pillar shed dark desolation,
While Israel bask’d all the night in its beam.
*	“ And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and
the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them,
but it gave light by night to these.” — Exod. xiv. 20.
So, when the dread clouds of anger enfold Thee,
From us, in thy mercy, the dark side remove;
While shrouded in terrors the guilty behold Thee,
Oh, turn upon us the mild light of thy Love!

WERE NOT THE SINFUL MARY’S TEARS, 
(Air. — Stevenson.)	
Were not the sinful Mary’s tears	
An offering worthy Heaven,
When, o'er the faults of former years,
She wept — and was forgiven ?
When, bringing every balmy sweet
Her day of luxury stored,
She o’er her Saviour’s hallow’d feet	
The precious odours pour’d ; —	

And wiped them with that golden hair,	
Where once the diamond shone;	
Though now those gems of grief were there
Which shine for God alone !	
Were not those sweets, so humbly shed —	
That hair — those weeping eyes —	
And the sunk heart, that inly bled —
Heaven’s noblest sacrifice ?
Thou, that hast slept in error's sleep,
Oh, would’st thou wake in Heaven,
Like Mary kneel, like Mary weep,
“ Love much* ” and be forgiven !
*	“ Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved
much.”— St. Luke, viL 47.
AS DOWN IN THE SUNLESS RETREATS.
(Ant.—Haydn.)
As down in the sunless retreats of the Ocean,
Sweet flowers are springing no mortal can see,
So, deep in my soul the still prayer of devotion,
Unheard by the world, rises silent to Thee,
My God ! silent, to Thee —
Pure, warm, silent, to Thee.
As still to the star of its worship, though clouded,
The needle points faithfully o’er the dim sea,
So, dark as I roam, in this wintry world shrouded,
The hope of my spirit turns trembling to Thee,
My God I trembling, to Thee —
True, fond, trembling, to Thee.
BUT WHO SHALL SEE
(Air. — Stevenson. )
But who shall see the glorious day
When, throned on Zion’s brow,
The Lord shall rend that veil away
Which hides the nations now ? *
When earth no more beneath the fear
Of his rebuke shall lie f;
When pain shall cease, and every tear
Be wiped from every eye. 
Then, Judah, thou no more shalt mourn
Beneath the heathen’s chain ;
*	“ And he will destroy, in this mountain, the face of the
covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over
pll nations.” — Isaiah, xxv. 7.
•f “ The rebuke of his people shall he take away from off
all the earth.**— Isaiah, xxv. 8.
ί “And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes;
neither shall there be any more pain.” — Rev. xxi. 4.
Thy days of splendour shall return,	
And all be new again.*	
The Fount of Life shall then be quaff’d	
In peace, by all who come f;
And every wind that blows shall waft
Some long-lost exile home.
*	“ And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold,	I	make	
all things new.”— Rev. xxi. 5.	i
f “ And whosoever will, let him take the water	of	life	
freely.” — Rev. xxii. 17.
ALMIGHTY GOD!
CHORUS OF PRIESTS.
(Air. — Mozart. ).
Almighty God I when round thy shrine
The Palm-tree’s heavenly branch we twine *,
(Emblem of Life’s eternal ray,
And Love that “ fadeth not away,v)
We bless the flowers, expanded allf,
We bless the leaves that never fall,
And trembling say, — “ In Eden thus
“ The Tree of Life may flower for us! ”
*	“ The Scriptures having declared that the Temple of
Jerusalem was a type of the Messiah, it is natural to con-
clude that the Palms, which made so conspicuous a figure
in that structure, represented that Life and Immortality which
were brought to light by the Gospel.”— Observations on the
Palm, as a sacred Emblem, by W. Tighe.
f “ And he carved all the walls of the house round about
with carved figures of cherubims, and palm-trees, and open
flowers.** — 1 Kings, vi. 29.
When round thy Cherubs — smiling calm,
Without their flames * — we wreathe the Palm,
Oh God ! we feel the emblem true —
Thy Mercy is eternal too.
Those Cherubs, with their smiling eyes,
That crown of Palm which never dies,
Are but the types of Thee above —
Eternal Life, and Peace, and Love 
*	“ When the passover of the tabernacles was revealed to
the great lawgiver in the mount, then the cherubic images
which appeared in that structure were no longer surrounded
by flames; for the tabernacle was a type of the dispensation of
mercy, by which Jehovah confirmed his gracious covenant to
redeem mankind. ”— Observations on the Palm,
OH FAIR! OH PUREST!
SAINT AUGUSTINE TO HIS SISTER.*
(Air. — Moore.)
Oh fair! oh purest! be thou the dove
That flies alone to some sunny grove,
And lives unseen, and bathes her wing,
All vestal white, in the limpid spring.
There, if the hovering hawk be near,
That limpid spring in its mirror clear
*	In St. Augustine’s Treatise upon the advantages of a solitary
life, addressed to his sister, there is the following fanciful pas-
sage, from which, the reader will perceive, the thought of this
song was taken : — “ Te, soror, nunquam nolo esse securam,
sed timere semperque tuam fragilitatem habere suspectam, ad
instar pavidae columbae frequentare rivos aquarum et quasi in
speculo accipitris cernere supervolantis effigiem et cavere. Rivi
aquarum sententiae sunt scripturarum, quae de limpidissimo
sapientiae fonte profluentes,” &c. &c.—De Vit. Eremit. ad
Sororem.
Reflects him, ere he reach his prey,
And warns the timorous bird away.
Be thou this dove;
Fairest, purest, be thou this dove.
The «acred pages of God’s own book
Shall be the spring, the eternal brook,
In whose holy mirror, night and day,
Thou’lt study Heaven’s reflected ray; —
And should the foes of virtue dare,
With gloomy wing, to seek thee there,
Thou wilt see how dark their shadows lie
Between Heaven and thee, and trembling fly I
Be thou that dove ;
Fairest, purest, be thou that dove.
ANGEL OF CHARITY.
(Air. — Handel.)
Angel of Charity, who, from above,
Comest to dwell a pilgrim here,
Thy voice is music, thy smile is love,
And Pity’s soul is in thy tear.
When on the shrine of God were laid
First-fruits of all most good and fair,
That ever bloom’d in Eden’s shade,
Thine was the holiest offering there.
Hope and her sister, Faith, were given
But as our guides to yonder sky ;
Soon as they reach the verge of heaven,
There, lost in perfect bliss, they die.*
But, long as Love, Almighty Love,
Shall on his throne of thrones abide,
Thou, Charity, shalt dwell above,
Smiling for ever by His side !
•	“ Then Faith shall fail, and holy Hope shall die,
One lost in certainty, and one in joy.” Prior.
BEHOLD THE SUN.
(Air. —Lord Mornington.)
Behold the Sun, how bright
From yonder East he springs,
As if the soul of life and light
Were breathing from his wings.
So bright the Gospel broke
Upon the souls of men ;
So fresh the dreaming world awoke
In Truth’s full radiance then.
Before yon Sun arose,
Stars cluster’d through the sky —
But oh how dim, how pale were those,
To His one burning eye !
So Truth lent many a ray,
To bless the Pagan’s night —
But, Lord, how weak, how cold were they
To Thy One glorious Light!
LORD, WHO SHALL BEAR THAT DAY.
(Air. — Dr. Boyce.)
Lord, who shall bear that day, so dread, so splendid,
When we shall see thy Angel, hov’ring o’er
This sinful world, with hand to heav’n extended,
And hear him swear by Thee that Time s no
more ? *
When Earth shall feel thy fast consuming ray —
Who, Mighty God, oh who shall bear that day ?
When through the world thy awful call hath
sounded —
“ Wake, all ye Dead, to judgment wake, ye
Dead!”+
*	“ And the Angel which 1 saw stand upon the sea and upon
the earth, lifted up his hand to heaven, and sware by Him that
liveth for ever and ever, that there should be time no longer.”—
Rev. x. 5,6.
•f “ Awake, ye Dead, and come to judgment.”
And from the clouds, by seraph eyes surrounded,
The Saviour shall put forth his radiant head *;
While Earth andHeav’n before Him pass awayf—
Who, Mighty God, oh who shall bear that day?

When, with a glance, th’ Eternal Judge shall sever	
Earth’s evil spirits from the pure and bright,	
And say to those, “ Depart from me for ever! ’*	
To these, “ Come, dwell with me in endless light! ” 
When each and all in silence take their way —
Who, Mighty God, oh who shall bear that day?
*	“ They shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of
heaven — and all the angels with him.”—Matt. xxiv. 30. and
*xxv. 31.
f “ From his face the earth and the heaven fled away.” —
Rev. xx. 11.
J “ And before Him shall be gathered all nations, and He
shall separate them one from another.
“ Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand,
Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you, &c.
“ Then shall He say also unto them on the left hand, De-
part from me, ye cursed, &c.
“ And these shall go away into everlasting punishment; but 
the righteous into life eternal.” — Matt. xxv. 32. et seq.	
OH, TEACH ME TO LOVE THEE.
(Air. —Haydn.)
Oh, teach me to love Thee, to feel what thou art,
Till, fill’d with the one sacred image, my heart
Shall all other passions disown;
Like some pure temple, that shines apart,
Reserved for Thy worship alone.
In joy and in sorrow, through praise and through
blame,
Thus still let me, living and dying the same,
In Thy service bloom and decay —
Like some lone altar, whose votive flame
In holiness wasteth away.
Though born in this desert, and doom’d by my birth
To pain and affliction, to darkness and dearth,
On Thee let my spirit rely —
Like some rude dial, that, fix’d on earth,
Still looks for its light from the sky.
WEEP, CHILDREN OF ISRAEL.
(Air. — Stevenson. )
Weep, weep for him, the Man of God * —
In yonder vale he sunk to rest;
But none of earth can point the sod 
That flowers above his sacred breast.
Weep, children of Israel, weep!
His doctrine fell like Heaven’s rain ,
His words refresh'd like Heaven’s dew —
Oh, ne'er shall Israel see again
A Chief, to God and her so true.
Weep, children of Israel, weep !
*	“ And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains
of Moab.”— Dent, xxxiv. 8.
f “ And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab:
but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day." — Ibid.
ver. 6.
{ *< My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall
distil as the dew.”—Mote»* Song.
Remember ye his parting gaze,
His farewell song by Jordan’s tide,
When, full of glory and of days,
He saw the promised land — and died.*
Weep, children of Israel, weep I
Yet died he not as men who sink,
Before our eyes, to soulless clay;
But, changed to spirit, like a wink
Of summer lightning, pass’d away.f
Weep, children of Israel, weep I
*	“ I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou
shalt not go over thither.”—Deut. xxxiv. 4.
t “ As he was going to embrace Eleazer and Joshua, and
was still discoursing with them, a cloud stood over him on
the sudden, and he disappeared in a certain valley, although
he wrote in the Holy Books that he died, which was done
out of fear, lest they should venture to say that, because of
his extraordinary virtue, he went to God.”—Josephus, book iv.
chap. viii.
IV.
LIKE MORNING, WHEN HER EARLY
BREEZE.
(Anu —Beethoven.)
Like morning, when her early breeze
Breaks up the surface of the seas,
That, in those furrows, dark with night,
Her hand may sow the seeds of light —
Thy Grace can send its breathings o’er
The Spirit, dark and lost before,
And, fresh’ning all its depths, prepare
For Truth divine to enter there.
Till David touch’d his sacred lyre,
In silence lay th’ unbreathing wire;
But when he swept its chords along,
Ev’n Angels stoop’d to hear that song.
So sleeps the soul, till Thou, oh Lord,
Shalt deign to touch its*lifeless chord —
Till, waked by Thee, its breath shall rise
In music, worthy of the skies!
COME, YE DISCONSOLATE.
(Am. — German.)
Come, ye disconsolate, where’er you languish,
Come, at God’s altar fervently kneel;
Here bring your wounded hearts, here tell your
anguish —
Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot heal.
Joy of the desolate, Light of the straying,
Hope, when all others die, fadeless and pure,
Here speaks the Comforter, in God’s name saying —
“ Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot cure.”
Go, ask the infidel, what boon he brings us,
What charm for aching hearts he can reveal,
Sweet as that heavenly promise Hope sings us —
“ Earth has no sorrow that God cannot heal.”

AWAKE, ARISE, THY LIGHT IS COME.
(Air---------------------Stevenson.)
Awake, arise, thy light is come*;
The nations, that before outshone thee,
Now at thy feet lie dark and dumb —
The glory of the Lord is on thee !
Arise — the Gentiles to thy ray,
From ev’ry nook of earth shall cluster;
And kings and princes haste to pay
Their homage to thy rising lustre.f
Lift up thine eyes around, and see,
O’er foreign fields, o’er farthest waters,
Thy exiled sons return to thee,
To thee return thy home-sick daughters.J
•	“ Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee.” — Isaiah, lx.
■f “ And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to
the brightness of thy rising.**— lb.
$ “ Lift up thine eyes round about and see; all they gather
And camels rich, from Midian’s tents,
Shall lay their treasures down before thee ;
And Saba bring her gold and scents,
To fill thy air, and sparkle o’er thee.*
See? who are these that, like a cloud f,
Are gathering from all earth’s dominions,
Like doves, long absent, when allow’d
Homeward to shoot their trembling pinions.
Surely the isles shall wait for me J,
The ships of Tarshish round will hover,
To bring thy sons across the sea,
And waft their gold and silver over.
themselves together, they come to thee*. thy sons shall come
from afar, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.*’ —·
Isaiah, lx.
*	“ The multitude of camels shall cover thee; the drome-
daries of Midian and £phah; all they from Sheba shall come;
they shall bring gold and incense.” — lb.
f “ Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to
their windows ? ” — lb.
J “ Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tar-
shish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their
gold with them.”— lb.
And Lebanon thy pomp shall grace * —
The fir, the pine, the palm victorious
Shall beautify our Holy Place,
And make the ground I tread on glorious.
No more shall Discord haunt thy waysf,
Nor ruin waste thy cheerless nation;
But thou shalt call thy portals, Praise,
And thou shalt name thy walls, Salvation.
The sun no more shall make thee bright J,
Nor moon shall lend her lustre to thee;
But God, Himself, shall be thy Light,
And flash eternal glory through thee.
*	“ The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee; the fir-tree,
the pine-tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of
my sanctuary, and I will make the place of my feet glorious.’1
— Isaiah, lx*
f “ Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting
nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy
walls, Salvation, and thy gates, Praise.”— lb.
f “ Thy sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither
for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the
Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thr
glory.” — lb.
Thy sun shall never more go down;
A ray, from heav’n itself descended,
Shall light thy everlasting crown —
Thy days of mourning all are ended.*
My own, elect, and righteous Land!
The Branch, for ever green and vernal,
Which I have planted with this hand —
Live thou shalt in Life Eternal, f
*	“ Thy sun shall no more go down; for the Lord shall be
thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be
ended.”— Isaiah, lx.
f “ Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall in-
herit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work
of my hands.” — lb.
THERE IS A BLEAK DESERT.
(Air. — Crescenttnl )
There is a bleak Desert, where daylight grows
weary
Of wasting its smile on a region so dreary —
What may that Desert be ?
’Tis Life, cheerless Life, where the few joys that come 
Are lost, like that daylight, for ’tis not their home.
There is a lone Pilgrim, before whose faint eyes
The water he pants for but sparkles and flies —
Who may that Pilgrim be ?
’Tis Man, hapless Man, through this life tempted on
By fair shining hopes, that in shining are gone.
There is a bright Fountain, through that Desert
stealing	
To pure lips alone its refreshment revealing—	
What may that Fountain be ?	
’Tis Truth, holy Truth, that, like springs under
ground,
By the gifted of Heaven alone can be found.*
There is a fair Spirit, whose wand hath the spell
To point where those waters in secrecy dwell —
Who may that Spirit be ?
’Tis Faith, humble Faith, who hath leam’d that,
where’er
Her wand bends to worship, the Truth must be
there!
*	In singing, the following line had better be adopted, —
“ Can but by the gifted of Heaven be found.”
SINCE FIRST THY WORD.
(Air. — Nicholas Freeman.)
Since first Thy Word awaked my heart,
Like new life dawning o’er me,
Where’er I turn mine eyes, Thou art,
All light and love before me.
Nought else I feel, or hear or see —
All bonds of earth I sever —
Thee, O God, and only Thee
I live for, now and ever.
Like him whose fetters dropp’d away
When light shone o’er his prison*,
My spirit, touch’d by Mercy’s ray,
Hath from her chains arisen.

*	“ And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him,
and a light shined in the prison, and his chains fell off from
his hands,” — Acts* xii. 7.
And shall a soul Thou bidst be free,
Return to bondage ? — never 
Thee, O God, and only Thee
I live for, now and ever.
HARK! ’TIS THE BREEZE.
(Anu —Rousseau.)
Hark ! *tis the breeze of twilight calling
Earth’s weary children to repose;
While, round the couch of Nature falling,
Gently the night’s soft curtains close.
Soon o’er a world, in sleep reclining,
Numberless stars, through yonder dark,
Shall look, like eyes of Cherubs shining
From out the veils that hid the Ark.
Guard us, oh Thou, who never sleepest,
Thou who, in silence throned above,
Throughout all time, unwearied, keepest
Thy watch of Glory, Pow’r, and Love.
Grant that, beneath thine eye, securely,
Our souls, awhile from life withdrawn,
May, in their darkness, stilly, purely,
Like “ sealed fountains,'* rest till dawn.
WHERE IS YOUR DWELLING, YE SAINTED?
(Air. — Harse.)
Where is your dwelling, ye Sainted ?
Through what Elysium more bright
Than fancy or hope ever painted,
Walk ye in glory and light ?
Who the same kingdom inherits ?
Breathes there a soul that may dare
Look to that world of Spirits,
Or hope to dwell with you there ?
Sages! who, ev’n in exploring
Nature through all her bright ways,
Went, like the Seraphs, adoring,
And veil’d your eyes in the blaze —
Martyrs! who left for our reaping
Truths you had sown in your blood —
Sinners ! whom long years of weeping
Chasten’d from evil to good —
Maidens! who, like the young Crescent,
Turning away your pale brows
From earth, and the light of the Present,	
Look’d to your Heavenly Spouse —	
Say, through what region enchanted	
Walk ye, in Heaven s sweet air ?	
Say, to what spirits ’tis granted,	
Bright souls, to dwell with you there ?	
HOW LIGHTLY MOUNTS THE MUSE’S WING.
( Air. — Anonymous. )
How lightly mounts the Muse’s wing,
Whose theme is in the skies —
Like morning larks, that sweeter sing
The nearer Heavn they rise.
Though Love his magic lyre may tune,
Yet ah, the flow’rs he round it wreathes
Were pluck’d beneath pale Passion's moon,
Whose madness in their odour breathes.
How purer far the sacred lute,
Hound which Devotion ties
Sweet flow’rs that turn to heav’nly fruit,
And palm that never dies.
Th6ugh War’s high-sounding harp may be
Most welcome to the hero’s ears,
Alas, his chords of victory
Are wet, all o’er, with human tears.
How far more sweet their numbers run,
Who hymn, like Saints above,
No victor, but th’ Eternal One,
No trophies but of Love I
GO FORTH TO THE MOUNT.
( Air. — Stevenson. )
Go forth to the Mount — bring the olive-branch
home *,
And rejoice, for the day of our Freedom is come !
From that timef, when the moon upon Ajalon’s vale,
Looking motionless down J, saw the kings of the
earth,
In the presence of God's mighty Champion, grow
pale —
Oh, never had Judah an hour of such mirth!
Go forth to the Mount—bring the olive-branch home,
And rejoice, for the day of our Freedom is come !
*	“ And that they should publish and proclaim in all their
cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and
fetch olive-branche3,” &c. &c. — Neh. viii. 15.
f “ For since the days of Joshua the son of Nun unto that
day had not the children of Israel done so: and there was
very great gladness.”— lb. 17.
I “ Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon,
in the valley of Ajalon.”— Josh. x. 12.

Bring myrtle and palm — bring the boughs of each
tree
That's worthy to wave o'er the tents of the Free. *
From that day, when the footsteps of Israel shone,
With a light not their own, through the Jordan’s
deep tide,
Whose waters shrunk back as the Ark glided onf —
Oh, never had Judah an hour of such pride!
Go forth to the Mount — bring the olive-branch
home,
And rejoice, for the day of our Freedom is come!
*	“ Fetch olive-branches and pine-branches, and myrtle-
branches, and palm-branches, and branches of thick trees, to
make booths.”— Neh. viii. 15.
f “ And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the
Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all
the Israelites passed over on dry ground.” — Josh. iiL 17.
IS IT NOT SWEET TO THINK, HEREAFTER.
(Air. —Haydn.)
Is it not sweet to think, hereafter,
When the Spirit leaves this sphere,
Love, with deathless wing, shall wfift her
To those she long hath mourn’d for here ?
Hearts, from which ’twas death to sever,
Eyes, this world can ne’er restore,
There, as warm, as bright as ever,
Shall meet us and be lost no more.
When wearily we wander, asking
Of earth and heav’n, where are they,
Beneath whose smile we once lay basking,
Blest, and thinking bliss would stay?
Hope still lifts her radiant finger
Pointing to th’ eternal Home,

Upon whose portal yet they linger,
Looking back for us to come.
Alas, alas — doth Hope deceive us ?
Shall friendship — love — shall all those ties
That bind a moment, and then leave us,
Be found again where nothing dies ?
Oh, if no other boon were given,
To keep our hearts from wrong and stain,
Who would not try to win a Heaven
Where all we love shall live again ?
WAR AGAINST BABYLON.
(Air. — Novello.)
“ War against Babylon !” shout we around*,
Be our banners through earth unfurl’d;
Rise up, ye nations, ye kings, at the sound f —
“War against Babylon!” shout through the
world!
Oh thou, that dwellest on many waters J,
Thy day of pride is ended now;
And the dark curse of Israel’s daughters
Breaks, like a thunder-cloud, over thy brow!
War, war, war against Babylon !
*	“ Shout against her round about.” — Jer. 1. 15.
f “ Set up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among
the nations, prepare the nations against her, call together
against her the kingdoms,” &c. &c. — lb. li. 27.
I “ Oh thou that dwellest upon many waters, thy end is
come."— Tb. 13.
Make bright the arrows, and gather the shields*,
Set the standard of God on high;	j
Swarm we, like locusts, o’er all her fields,
M Zion” our watchword, and “ vengeance” our
cry 
Woe! woe 1 — the time of thy visitation 
Is come, proud Land, thy doom is cast —
And the black surge of desolation
Sweeps o'er thy guilty head, at last!
War, war, war against Babylon 
*	“ Make bright the arrows; gather the shields..........set
the standard upon the walls of Babylon.” — Jer. li. 11, 12. 
f “ Woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of
their visitation ! ” — Jer. L 27.	