PREFACE.
THE Public have already been informed, through
the medium of the daily prints, that, among the
distinguished visitors to the Congress lately held
at Aix-bu-Chapelle, were Mr. Bob Gregson, Mr·
George Coopee, and a few more illustrious bre-
thren of The Fancy. It had been resolved at a.
Grand Meeting of the Pugilistic Fraternity, that,
as all the milling Powers of Europe were about
to assemble, personally or by deputy, at Aix-la*
Chapelle, it was but right that The Fancy should
have its representatives there as well as the rest,
and these gentlemen were accordingly selected for
that high and honourable office. A description
of this Meeting, of the speeches spoken, the re-
solutions, &c. &c. has been given in a letter written
by one of the most eminent of the profession,
which will be found in the Appendix, No. I.
Mr. Crib's Memorial, which now for the first time
meets the public eye, was drawn up for the pur-
pose of bang transmitted by these gentlemen to
Congress; and, as it could not possibly be in
better hands for the enforcement of every point
connected with the subject, there is every reason
to hope that it has made a suitable impression
upon that body.
The favour into which this branch of Gymnas-
tics, called Pugilism, (from the Greek, rt/£, as the
Author of Boxiana learnedly observes) has risen
with the Public of late years, and the long season
'Hitir-rl h,
6f tranquillity which we are now promised by the
new Millenarians of the Holy League, encourage
us to look forward with some degree of sanguine-
ness to an order of things, like that which Plato
and Tom Chib have described, (the former in
the motto prefixed to this work, and the latter in
the interesting Memorial that follows), when the
Miffing shalPsucoeed to the Military system, and
The Fancy will· be the sole arbitress ofthe trifling
disputes of mankind. From a wish to throw
every possible light on the history of an Art,
winch is destined ere long to have such influence
upon the affairs of the world* I have, for some
time past, been emptoyed in a voluminous and
elaborate work, entitled " A Parallel between
Ancient and Modem Pugilism,” which is now in
a state of considerable forwardness, and which
I hope to have ready for delivery to subscribers


oja the ^on^ing of the approaching fight between
Jtandall apd Martin. Had the elegant author of
Boxiana extended his inquires to the ancient
state of the art, I should not have presumed to
interfere with a historian so competent. But, as
his researches into antiquity have gone no farther
than the one valuable specimen of erudition which
I have given above, I feel the less hesitation
-------— ■ novo» decerpere flores,
Insignemque meo capiti petere inde coronam,
Unde prius nulli velarint tempora Musae.*
Lucret. Lib. 4. v. 3.
The variety of studies necessary for such a task,
and the multiplicity of references which it re-
quires, as well to the living as the dead, can only
be fully appreciated by him who has had the
*	To wander through The Fancy’s bowers,
To gather new, unheard-of flowers,
And wreathe such garlands for my brow,
As Poet never wreathed till now!
patience to perform it Alternately studying in
the Museum and the Fives Court—passing from
jthe Academy of Plato to that of Mr. Jackson—
now indulging in Attic flashes with Aristophanes,
and now studying Flash in the Attics of Cock
Court*—between so many and such various
associations has my mind been divided during
the task, that sometimes, in my bewilderment,
I have confounded Ancients and Modems to-
gether,—mistaken the Greek of St. Giles’s for that
of Athens, and have even found myself tracing
Bill Gibbons and his Bull in the “ taurum tibi^
ptUcher JpoIkT of Virgil. My printer, too, has
been affected with similar hallucinations. The
MU. Glorios. of Plautus he converted, the other
•'Hie residence of The Nonpareil, Jack Randallwhere,the day
after his last great victory, he held a levee, which was attended,
of course, by all the leading characters of St. Giles’s.
day, into a Glorious Mill; and more than'once,
when I have referred to Tom. prim, or Tom.
quart. he has substituted Tom Crib and Toni
Oliver in their places. Notwithstanding all this,
the work will be found, I trust, tolerably correct;
and as an Analysis of its opening Chapters may
not only gratify the impatience of the Fwiciful
World,but save my future reviewers ^some trouble,
it is here given as succinctly as possible.
Chap. 1. contains some accountof the ancient
inventors of pugilism, Epeus and Amycus.—The
early exploit of thfe former, in milling his twin·
brother, in ventre matris, and so getting before
him into the world, as related by Eustathius on
the authority of Lycophron.—Amycus, a Royal
Amateur of the Fancy, who challenged to the
scratch all strangers that landed on his shore.—
The Combat between him and Pollux, (who, to
use the classic phrase, served him out), as de-
scribed by Theocritus,* Apollonius Rhodius, f
and Valerius Flaccus. J—Respective merits of
these three descriptions.—Theocritus by far the
best; and altogether, perhaps, the most scientific
account of a Boxing-match in all antiquity.—
Apollonius ought to have done better, with such
a model before him; but, evidently not up to the
thing (whatever Scaliger may say), and his similes
all slum.§—Valerius Flaccus, the first Latin Epic
Poet after Virgil, has done ample justice to this
*	Idyl. 22.
t Argonaut. Lib. 2.
t Lib. 4.
$ Except one, βνητκ9ς ita, which is good, and which Fawkes,
therefore, has omitted. The following couplet from his translation
is, however,fanciful enough:—
“ So from their batter’d cheeks loud echoes sprung,
Their dash*d teeth crackled, and their jaw-bones rung.*·
Set-to; the fdnts, facers,* and fibbers, all de-
scribed most spiritedly.
Chap. 2. proves that the Pancratium of the
ancients, as combining boxing and wrestling, was
the branch of their Gymnastics that most re-
sembled our modern Pugilism; cross-buttocking
(or what the Greeks called ύχοΓχίλιζαγ) being as
indispensable an ingredient, as nobbing, flooring,
&c. &c.—Their ideas of a stand-up flght very
*	Emicat hic, dcxtramque parat, deitramque minator
Tyndarides; redit huc oculis & pondere Bebiyx
Sic ratus: ille autem celeri rapit ora sinistrd.
>	Lib.	4.	v.	290.
We have here a feint and afacer together. The manner in which
Valerius Flaccus describes the multitude of 6/acA-guards that
usually assemble on such occas.^ s, is highly poetical and pic-
turesque ; be supposes them to be Shades from Tartarus.—
Et pater orantes caesorum Tajrtarus umbras
Nube cav& tandem ad merit® spectacula pugnae
Emittit; summi nigrescunt culmina montis, v. 258.
similar to our own, as appears from the to itamv
αλληλβ; ΟΡΘΟΣΤΑΔΗΝ of Lucian,—Γυρνάς.
Chap. S. examines the ancient terms of the
Fancy, as given by Pollux (Onomast. ad fin.
IAb. 8.) and others; and compares them with
the modern.—For example, αγχαν, to throttle—
λυγιξειγ, evidently tjie origin of our word to lug—
αγχυξΐξε&9 to anchor a fellow, (see Grose’s Greek
Dictionary, for the word anchor)—(perf.
pass, tetyoyfbai), from which is derived to drag;
and whence, also, a flash etymologist might con*
Irive to derive αμβ, drama, Thespis having first
performed in a drag.* This chapter will be
found highly curious; distinguished, I flatter
myself, by much of that «cuteness, which enabled
a late illustrious Professor to discover that our
* The Flash term for a cart.
English “ Son of a Gun" was nothing more than
the ΤΙχις Τυτης (Dor.) of the Greeks.
Cl tap. 4. enumerates the many celebrated
Boxers of antiquity.—Eryx, (grandson of the
Amycus already mentioned), whom Hercules is
said to have finished in style.—Phrynon, the
Athenian General, and Autolycus, of whom, Pau-
sanias tells us, there was a statue in the Pry-
taneum—The celebrated Pugilist, who, at the
very moment he was expiring, had game enough
to make his adversary give in; which interesting
circumstance forms the subject of one of the Pic-
tures of Philostratus, Icon. Lib. % Imag. 6.—and
above all, that renowned Son of the Fancy, Me*
lancomas, the favourite of the Emperor Titus, in
whose praise Dio Chrysostomus has left us two
elaborate orations. *—The peculiarities of this
boxer discussed—his power of standing with his
arms extended, for two whole days, without any
rest, {[forafoi ην, says Dio, xai too qfis fa; εζγς ptmv
avarelzxwf -ϊα$	κλι	ok	ay siSev βδεις ύφ*νΊ&
aohv q ava,*xuva.[LiYOv ών*εζ tuition. Orat. 28.), by
which means he wore out his adversary's bottom,
and conquered without either giving or taking.
This bloodless system of miMng, which trusted
for victory to patience alone, has afforded to the
orator, Themistius, a happy illustration of the
•peaceful conquests which he attributes to the
Emperor Valens, f
*	-The following words, in which £)io so decidedly prefers the
art of the Boxer to that of the Soldier, would perhaps have been a
Still more significant motto to Mr. Crib’s Memorial than that which
I have chosen from Plato. Και καβολν it tywyt τ»το ηηζ η ηοις
•jtoXtfMt; Λ^ιτη; ιτζοχζίνω.
t Η» τις tut twy frooyotanr *rwV ri/JtiT tfurr %v%h; avtjp, Μ iXayfeo/uut;
νήμα ax/iw.............ΙυΙ’ίζ ovitva TTwnvli τ'ωσας, ν$ι iret1a£a(f pom
Chap. 5. notices some curious points of simi*
larity between the ancient and modem Fancy—
Thus, Theocritus, in his Milling-match, calls
Amycus “ a gluttonwhich is well known to be
the classical phrase at Moulsey-Hurst, for one
who, like Amycus, takes a deal of punishment
before he is satisfied.
ΤΙως yaj in Δ»ο; uto; ΑΔΗΦΑΓΟΝ χαβιιλιη
In the same Idyl the poet describes the Bebrycian
hero as ττληγα,ις μ,ί&υων, “ drunk with blows,’'
which is precisely the language of our Fancy
bulletins; for example, “ Turner appeared as if
drunk, and made a heavy lolloping hit,” &c. &c.*
—The resemblance in the manner of fighting still
more striking and important. Thus we find
*rn retru και τ»ι runr	aralaau itayl&g antxmtt tv;
TfcnEMIST. Orat. Tiffi Ειρήνης.
•	Kent’s Weekly Dispatch.
Crib's favourite system of milling on the retreat,
which he practised so successfully in his combats
with Gregson and Molyneux, adopted by Alcida-
mus, the Spartan, in the battle between him and
Capaneus, so minutely and vividly described by
Statius, Thebaid, Lib. 6.
. ......sed non, taracn, immemor artis,
Adversus fugit, et fugient tamen ictibus obstat. *
And it will be only necessary to compare together
two extracts from Boxiana and the Bard of Syra-
cuse, to see how similar in their manoeuvres have
been the millers of all ages—u The Man of
Colour, to prevent being fibbed, grasped tight
hold of Carter's hand^-f-—(Account of the Fight
between Robinson, the Black, and Carter), which,
*	Yet, not unmindful of his art, he hies,
But turns his face, and combats as he flies.
Leuis.
t A manoeuvre, generally called Tom Oucn's stop.
(translating λιλα/ο^νο*,“ the Lily-white,” #) is al-
most word for word with the following:
.	Ητοι	iyt	ft§tu	Ti	XtXatOfjuwf /xrya tfyvf
Ixmn fxty axawv IIoXi/Jivxio; ιλλαβι χκρα.
Theocrit.
Chap. 6. proves, from the jawing·match and
Set-to between Ulysses and the Beggar in the
18th Book of the Odyssey, that the ancients
(notwithstanding their Λκα/α μαχοντων, or Laws
of Combatants, which, Artemidorus says in his
chap. 33. repi Μονομαχ, extended to pugilism as
well as other kinds of combats) did not properly
understand fair play; as Ulysses is here obliged
to require an oath from the standers-by, that they
will not deal him a sly knock, while he is cleaning
out the mumper—
M*i Tif ·»* Ιξω η,α ftpiuy ijx» χι^ι *αχιι·ι
Πλνζη alaoBaKKurtf τ»1ω it fxt t$i ίαμασση.
•	The Flash term for a negro \ and also for a chimney-sweeper.
Chap. 7. describes the Cstus, and shows that
the Greeks, for mere exercise or sparring, made
use of muffles or gloves as we do, which they
called σφαιραι. This appears particularly from a
passage in Plato, de Leg. Lib. 8, where, speaking
of training, he says, it is only by frequent use of
the gloves that a knowledge of stopping and
hitting can be acquired. The whole passage is
curious, as proving that the Divine Plato was
not altogether a novice in the Fancy lay.*·—
Kou w$ εγγυΐαΐα του ομοιβ, α>1ι ϊμ,&>Ίων ΣΦΑΙΡΑΣ ay
*	Another philosopher, Seneca, has shewn himself equally flash
on the subject, and, in his 13th Epistle, lays it down as an axiom,
that no pugilist can be considered worth any thing, till he has had
fiis peepers taken measure of for a suit of mourning, or, in common
language, has received a pair of black eyes. The whole passage
is edifying:—“ Non potest athleta magnos spiritus ad certamen
adferre, qui nunquam wgillatus est. Ille qui vidit sanguinem suum,
cujas dentes crepuerunt sub pugno, ille qui supplantatus adversarium
toto tulit corpore, nec projecit animum projectus, qui quodes cccidit
contumacior resurrexit, cum magna spe descendit ad pugnaro.”
otwidi ΠΛΗΓΑΙ τ’* κal ou ΤΩΝ ΠΛΗΓΏΝ
ΕΤΛΑΒΕΙΑΙ hiμ^λεΐωνίω εις η $υνούον Ιχα,νωζ.—
These muffles were called by the Romans sacculi,
as we findfromTrebellius Pollio, who in describing
a triumph of Gallienus, mentions the “ Pugiles
sacculis non veritate pugilantes."
Chap. 8. adverts to the pugilistic exhibitions
of the Spartan ladies, which Propertius has thus
commemorated—
Pulverulentoque ad extremos stat fee mina metas,
Et patitur duro vulnera pancratio;
Nunc ligat ad caestum gaudentia brachia loris, &c.&c.
JUb. 3. EI. 14.
and to prove that the moderns are not behind-
hand with the ancients in this respect, cites the
following instance recorded in Boxiana.—“ George
Madox, in this battle, was seconded by his sister,
Grace, who, upon its conclusion, tossed up her hat in.
defiance, and offered to fight any man present”—
also the memorable challenge, given in the same
work (V. i. p. 300.), which passed between Mrs.
Elizabeth Wilkinson of Clerkenwell, and Miss
Hannah Hyfield of Newgate-Market—-another	'
proof that the English may boast many a “ dolce
gnomera* as well as the· Greeks.
Chap. 9. contains Accounts of all the celebrated
Set-tos of antiquity, translated from the works of
the different authors that have described them,—
viz. the famous Argonautic Battle, as detailed by
the three poets mentioned in chap. 1.—the Fight
between Epeus and Euryalus, in the 23d Book
of the Iliad, and between Ulysses and Irus in the
18th Book of the Odyssey—the Combat of Dares
and Entellus in the 5th iEneid,—of Capaneus
and Alcidamus, already referred to, in Statius,
and of Achelous and Hercules in the 9th Book
of the Metamorphoses;—though this last is rather
a wrestling-bout than a mill, resembling that
between Hercules * and Antaeus in the 4th Book
of Lucan. The reader who is anxious to know
how I have succeeded in this part of my task*
will find, as a specimen, my translation from
Virgil in the Appendix to the present work,
No. 2.
Chap, 10. Considers the various arguments, foi
•	Though wrestling was evidently the favourite sport of Her-
cules, we find him, in the Alcestes, just returned from a Bruising-
match; and it is a curious proof of the superior consideration in
which these arts were held, that for the lighter exercises, he tells
us, horses alone were the reward, while to conquerors in the higher
games of pugilism and wrestling, whole herds of cattle (with some*
titaes a young lady into the bargain) were given as prizes.
to*cn i’au ra μίΐζονα
Nixwffig τνγμην χαι παλΊΥ, /5βι*ψοφΙα
Γυνή iW αν%ις im τ\ Eurip,
and against Pugilism, advanced by writers ancient
and modern.—A strange instance of either igno-
rance or wilful falsehood in Lucian, who, in his
Anacharsis, has represented Solon as one of the
warmest advocates for Pugilism, whereas we know
from Diogenes Laertius that that legislator took
every possible puns to discourage and suppress
it—Alexander the Great, too, tasteless enough to
prohibit the Fancy, (Plutarch in Vit.)—Galen
in many parts of his works, but particularly in the
Hortat. ad. Art. condemns the practice as ener-
vating and pernicious.*—On the other side, the
testimonies in its favour, numerous.—The greater
*	It was remarked by the ancient physicians, that men who
were in the habit of boxing and wrestling became remarkably lean
and slender from the loins downward, while the upper parts of
their frame acquired prodigious size and strength. I could name
some pugilists of the present day, whose persons seem to warrant
the truth of this observation.
number of Pindar’s Nemean Odes written in
praise of pugilistic champions;—and Isocrates,
though he represents Alcibiades as despising the
art, yet acknowledges that its professors were
held in high estimation through Greece, and that
those cities, where victorious pugilists were born,
became illustrious from that circumstance;* just
as Bristol has been rendered immortal by the
production of such heroes as Tom Crib, Harry
Harmer, Big Ben, Dutch Sam, &c. &c.—Ammia-
nus Marcellinus tells us how much that religious
andpugnaciousEmperor, Constantius,delighted in
the Set-tos, “ pugilum-f* vicissim se concidentium
* Τας τ’ αθλ>{)ας	%at τας ΐΐοΚιις ανομα.ς·ας yiyyofxtmg των
vixwvW Isocrat ittpi rov Ζιυγον;·—An oration written by Iso-
crates for the son of Alcibiades.
t Notwithstanding that the historian expressly says(i pugilum,”
Lipsius is so anxious to press this circumstance into his Account of
the Ancient Gladiators, that he insists such an effusion of claret
perfusorumque sanguine.*—To these are added
still more flattering testimonies; such as that of
Isidorus, who calls Pugilism “ virtus,” as if par
excellence; * and the yet more enthusiastic tribute
with which Eustathius reproaches the Pagans,
of having enrolled their Boxers in the number of
the Gods.—In short, the whole chapter is full of
erudition and vss;—from Z^cophron (whose very
name smacks of pugilism) down to Boxiana and
the Weekly Despatch, not an author on the
subject is omitted.
So much for my “ Parallel between Ancient
and Modem Pugilism.’’ And now, with respect
to that peculiar language, called Flash or St.
could only have taken place in the gladiatorial combat. But Lip·
sius never was at Moulsey Hurst. See his Saturnal. Sermon.
Lib. 1. cap. 2.
*	Origin. Lib. 18. c. 18.
Giles's Greek, in which Mr. Crib's Memorial
and the other articles in the present volume are
written, I beg to trouble the reader with a few
observations. As this expressive language was
originally invented, and is still used, like the
cipher of the diplomatists, for purposes of secrecy,
and as a means of eluding the vigilance of a cer-
tain class of persons, called, flashici. Traps, or in
common language, Bow-street-Officers, it is subject
of course to continual change, and is perpetually
either altering the meaning of old words, or add-
ing new ones, according as the great object,
secrecy, renders it prudent to have recourse to
such innovations. In this respect, also, it re-
sembles the cryptography of kings and ambassa-
dors, who by a continual change of cipher con-
trive to baffle the inquisitiveness of the enemy.
But, notwithstanding the Protean nature of the
Flash or Cant language, the greater part of its
vocabulary has remained unchanged for centuries,
and many of the words used by the Canting
Beggars in Beaumont and Fletcher,* and the
Gipsies in Ben Jonson’s Masque,-}· are still to
be heard among the Gnostics of Dyot-street and
Tothill-fields. To prig is still to steal; { to fib*
to beat; lour, money; duds, clothes; § prancers,
*	In their arousing comedy of “ The Beggar’s Bush.”
t The Masque of the Gipsies Metamorphosed.—The Gipsy lan-
guage, indeed, with the exception of such terms as relate to their
own peculiar customs, differs but little from the regular Flash; as
may be seen by consulting the Vocabulary, subjoined to the Life of
Bamfylde-Moor Carew.
X See the third Chapter, 1st Book of the History of Jonathan
Wild, for “ an undeniable testimony of the great antiquity of
Priggi$m”
§ An angler for duds is thus described by Dekker. " He car-
ries a short staff in his hand, which is called a filch, having in the
nab or head of it a ferme (that is to say a hole) into which, upon
any piece of service, when he goes a filching, he putteth a hooke
of iron, with which hooke he angles at a window in the dead of
horses; bauzing-ken, an alehouse; cove, a fellow;
a sow's baby, a pig, &c. &c. There are also
several instances of the same term, preserved with
a totally different signification. Thus, to miU>
which was originally “ to rob,” # is now ςζ to beat
or fight;” and the word rum, which in Ben Jon-
son’s time, and even so late as Grose, meant fine
and good, is now generally used for the veiy
opposite qualities; as, “ he’s but a rum one,” &c.
Most of the Cant phrases in Head’s English
Rogue, which was published, I believe, in 1666,
would be intelligible to a Greek of the present
day; though it must be confessed that the Songs
which both he and Dekker have given would
night for shirts, smockes, or any other linen or woollen." En-
glish Villanies.
“ Can they cant or mill? are they masters in their art?”—
Ben Jonson. To mill, however, sometimes signified l( to kill.11
Thus, to mill a bleating cheat, i. e. to kill a sheep.
puzzle even that “ Graiae gentis decus,” Caleb
Baldwin, himself. For instance, one of the
amplest begins,
Bing out, bien Morts, and tonre and toure,
Bing out, bien Morts, and toure;
For all your duds are bing’d awast;
The bien Cove hath the loure.
To the cultivation, in our times, of the science
of Pugilism, the Flash Language is indebted for a
considerable addition to its treasures. Indeed,
so impossible is it to describe the operations of
The Fancy without words of proportionate
energy to do justice to the subject, that we find
Pope and Cowper, in their translation of the Set-to
in the Iliad, pressing words into the service which
had seldom, I think, if ever, been enlisted into
the ranks of poetry before. Thus Pope,
Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
Mash all his bones and all his body pound.	.
Cowper, in the same manner, translates κοψε ft
...... itapytoy, “ pasKd him on the cheekand,
in describing the wrestling-match, makes use of
a term, now more properly applied to a peculiar
kind of blow,* of which Mendoza is supposed to
have been the inventor.
Then his wiles
Forgat not he, but on the ham behind
Chopp'd him.
Before I conclude this Preface, which has
already I fear extended to an unconscionable
length, I cannot help expressing my regret at the
selection which Mr. Crib has made, of one of the
Combatants introduced into the imaginary Set-to
*	“ A chopper is a blow, struck on the face with the back of the
hand. Mendoza claims the honour of its invention, but unjustly;
he certainly revived, and considerably improved it. It was prac*
tised long before our time—Broughton occasionally used it; and
Slack, it alto appears, struck the chopper in giving the return in
many of his battles.”—Boxiana, v. 2. p. 20.
that follows. That person has already been ex-
hibited, perhaps, “ usque ad nauseam ” before the
Public; and, without entering into the propriety of
meddling with such a personage at all, it is certain
that, as a mere matter of taste, he ought now to
be let alone. All that can be alleged for Mr*
Cbib is—what Rabelais has said in defending the
moral notions of another kind of cattle—Ik*
“ knows no better.” But for myself, in my edi-
torial capacity, I take this opportunity of de-
claring, that, as far as I am concerned, the per-
son in question shall henceforward be safe and
inviolate; and, as the Covent>Garden Managers
said, when they withdrew their much-hissed
Elephant* this is positively the last time of his
appearing on the Stage.

TOM CRIB S MEMORIAL
TO
CONGRESS.
MOST Holy, and High, and Legitimate squad,
First Swells* of the world, since Boneys in quod,\
Who have ev’ry thing now, as Bill Gibbons would say,
“Like the bull in the china shop, all your own way”—
Whatsoever employs your magnificent nobs, J
Whether diddling your subjects, and gutting their
Jobs,— §
•	&axU, a great man.
t Iu prison. The dab fs in quod j the rogue is in prison.
X Heads.
$ Taking out the contents. Thus pitting a quart pot, (or taking
out the living of it) i. e. drinking it off.
(While you hum the poor spoonies* with speeehes>
so pretty,
*Bout Freedom, and Order, and—all my eye, Betty)
Whether praying, or dressing, or dancing the hays,
Or lappingyourcongof at Lord C^-stl-t-r—gh’s,—J
(While his Lordship, as usual, that very great dab §
At the flowers of rhet’ric, is flashing his gab ||)
Or holding State Dinners, to talk of the weather,
And cut up your mutton and Europe together!
Whatever your gammon, whatever your talk,
Oh deign, ye illustrious Cocks of the Walk,
To attend for a moment,—and if the Fine Arts
Offibbing	and boring be dear to your hearts j
*	Simpletons, alias Innocents.	f Drinking your tea.
$ See the Appendix, No. 3.	§ An adept.
|| Showing off his talk.—Better expressed, perhaps, by a late
wit, who, upon being asked what was goiug on in the House of
Commons, answered, “ only Lord C , airing his vocabulary
% All terms of the Fancy, and familiar to those who read the
Transactions of the Pugilistic Society.
If to level, ^ to punish, to ruffian% mankind, V
And to darken their daylights, * be pleasures refin'd V
(As they must be) fop every Legitimate mind,— /
Oh listen to one, who, both able and willing
To spread through creation the myst’ries of milling,
(And, as to whose politics, search the world round,
Not a sturdier Pittite f e’er liv’d—under ground)
Has thought of a plan, whichr—excuse his pre-
sumption—
He hereby submits to your Royal rumgumption.X
It being now settled that emp’rors and kings.
Like kites made of foolscap, are highflying things,
To whose tails a few millions of subjects, or so,
Have been tied in a string, to be whisk'd to and fro, X
Just wherever it suits the said foolscap to go—	>
*	To close op tlieir eyes—alias, to sow up their sees.
f Tom received his first education in a Coal Fit; from whence
he has been honoured with the name of" the Black Diamond.”
X Gumption or Rumgumption, comprehension, capacity.
This being all settled, and Freedom all gammon, ·
And nought but your Honours worth wasting a
d—n on j
While snug and secure you may now run your rigs, f
Without fear that old Boney will bother your gigs—
As your Honours, too, bless you! though all of a
trade,
Yet agreeing like new ones, have lately been made
Special constables o’er us, for keeping the peace,—
Let us hope now that wars and rumbustious will cease;
That soldiers and guds, like " the Dev’l and his works,”
Will henceforward be left to Jews, Negers, and
Turks \
Tilllfrotwi Bess J shall soon, like Miss TabithaFusty,
For want of a spark to go off with, grow rusty,
•	Nonsense or humbug.
+ Play your tricks.
J A soldier’s fire-lock.
And lobsters* will lie such a drug upon hand,
That our do-nothing Captains must all getjapann'dl f
My eyes, how delightful!—the rabble well gagg'd,
The Swells in high feather, and old Boney lagg'd!%
But, though we must hope for such good times as these,
Yet as something may happen to kick up a breeze—
Some quarrel, reserv’d for your own private picking—
Some grudge, even now in your great gizzards
sticking—
(God knows about what—about money, mayhap,
Or the Papists, or Dutch, or tliat Kid,§ Master Napw)
•	Soldiers, from the colour of their clothes. “ To boil one’s lob-
ster means for a churchman to turn soldier; lobsters, which are of
a bluish black, being made red by boiling.*—Grwe. Butler’s in-
genious simile will occur to the reader:—
When, like a lobster boiled, the Mom
From black to red began to tarn.
Ordained—i. e. become clergymen.
X Transported.
$ Child.—Hence our useful word, kidnapper—to nab a kid
being to steal a child. Indeed, we need but recollect thre many ex-
And,settingin case there should come such a ntmptu,
As some mode of settling the chat we must compass,
With which the tag-rag* will have nothing· to do—
What think you, great Swells, of a Royal Set-to?+
A Ring and fair fist-work at Aix-la-Chapelle,
Or at old Moulsey-Hurst, if you likes it as well—
And that all may be fair as to wind, weight, and
science,
FU answer to train ihe whole Holy Alliance !
Just think, please your Mqj&ties, how you'd prefer it
To mills such as Waterloo, where all the merit
To Vulgar, red-coated rapscallions must fall,
Who have no Right Divine to have merit at all!
cellent and necessary words to which Johnson has affixed the stigma
of" cant term," to be aware how considerably the £ngli*li language
has been enriched by the contributions of the Flash fraternity.
*	The common people, the mobility,
f A boxing-match.
How much more select your own quiet Set-tos /—
And how vastly genteeler ’twill sound in the news,
'{Kent's Weekly Dispatch, that beats all others hollow
For Fancy transactions) in terms such as follow:—
ACCOUNT OF THE GRAND SET-TO BETWEEN LONG
SANDY AND GEORGY THE PORFU8.
Last Tuesday, at Moulsey, the Balance of Power
Was settled by twelve Tightish Rounds, in an hour—
The Buffers, * both “ Boys of the Holy Ground—f
Long Sandy, by name of the Bear much renown’d,
And Georgy the Porpus, λ prime glutton reckon’d—
Old thingummee Pottso { was Long Sandy’s second,
*	Boxers—Irish cant.
f The hitch in the metre here was rendered necessary by the
quotation, which is from a celebrated Fancy chant, ending, every
verse, thus:—
For we are the Boys of the Hely Ground,
And we’ll dance upon nothing, and tom us round!
It is almost needless to add that the Holy Ground, or Land, is
a well-known region of St. Giles’s.
t Tom means, I presume, the celebrated diplomatist* Pozzo di
And Georgy’s was Pat C—stl—r— gh,—he, who
lives
At the sign of the King’s Arms a-kimbo, and gives
His small beer about, with the air of a chap
Who believed it himself a prodigious strong tap.
This being the first true Legitimate Match
SinceToM took to training these Stvells for the scratch,
Every lover of life, that had rhino to spare,
From sly little Moses to B—r—g, was there.
Never since the renown’d days of Broughton and
Figg*
Was the Fanciful World in such very prime twig—f
And long before daylight, gigs, rattlers {, and prads §,
Were in motion for Moulsey, brimful of the Lads.
Borgo.—The Irish used to claim the dancer Didelot as their coun-
tryman, insisting that the O had slipped out of its right place, and
that his real name was Mr. O'Diddle. On the same principle they
will, perhaps, assert their right to M. Pozzo.
*	The chief founders of the modern school of pugilism,
t High spirits or condition. % Coaches. § Horses.
Jack Eld—n, Old Sid, and some more, had come
down
On the eveniDg before, and put up at The Crown
Their old favourite sign, where themselves and their
brothers
Getgrud* at cheap rate, though itfleeces all others \
Nor matters it how we, plebeians, condemn,
As The Crown *s always sure of its license from them.
’Twas diverting to see, as one ogled around,
How Corinthians f and Commoners mixed on the
ground.
HereM—ntr—se and an Israelite met faceto face,
The Duke, a place-hunter, the Jew, from Duke’s Place;
While Nicky V—ns—t, not caring to roam,
Got among the iMte-bag-men,\ and felt quite at home.
*	Victuals.	t	Men	of	rank—vide Boxiana, passim.
J Pick-pocketv
Here stood in a corner, well screen’d from the weather.
Old Sid and the great Doctor Eady together,
Both fam’d on the walls—with a d—n, in addition.
Prefix’d to the name of the former Physician.
Here C—md—n, who never till now was suspected
Of Fancy, or ought that is therewith connected,
Got dose to a dealer in donkies, who eyed him,
Jack Scroggins remark’d, “just as if he’d have
buy'd him ”
While poor Bogy B—ck—gh—m well might look
pale,
As there stood a great Rat-catcher close to his tail!
’Mong the vehicles, too, which were many and
various,
From natty barouche down to buggy precarious^
We tmgg'd more than one queerish sort of turn-out',—*
€—nn—g came in a job, and then canter'd about
Oa a showy, but hot and unsound, bit of blood,
.(For a leader once meant, but cast off, as no good)
Lookinground, to secure a snug place if hecould
While Eld—n, long doubting between a grey nag
And a vohite one to mount, took his stand in a drag.*
At a quarter past ten, by Pat C—tl—r—gh’s
tattler, f	.
€rib came on the ground, in a four-in-hand rattier ^
(For Tom, since he took to these Holy Allies,
Is as tip-top a leau as all Bond Street supplies.)
And, on seeing the Champion, loud cries of “ Fight,
fight/1
“ Ring, ring,” “ Whip the Gemmen,” were heard
left and right·
#	A cart or waggon,
f A watch.
But the kids, though impatient, were Roomed to
delay,	1
As the Old P. C.* ropes (which are not» mark’d >
H.A.)t	I
Being hack’d i n the service, it seems had gi ν’ n way;
And as rope is an article much up in price
Since the Bank took to hanging, the lads had to
splice.
At length, the two Sxoells, having entered the Ring
To the tune the cm died of, called “ God save the
King,”
Each threw up his castorX ’mid general huzzas—
And, if dressing would do, never yet, since the days
When Humphries stood up to the Israelite’s thumps,
In gold-spangled stockings and touch-me-not pumps, §
*	The ropes and stakes used at the prize fights, being the pro-
perty of the Pugilistic Club, are marked wiih the initials P. C.
f For “ Holy Alliance."	X	Hat
§ u The fine manly form of Humphries was seen to great ad-
Has there any thing equaled thz fal-lals and tricks
That bedizen’d old Georgy* s bang-up tog and kicks / *
Havingfirst shaken daddiesf (to show, Jackson said,
It was €t pro bono Pimlico chiefly they bled)
Both peel'd §—but, on laying his Dandy-belt by,
Old Georgy went floush, and his backers look’d shy;
vantage; he had on a pair of fine flannel drawers, white silk stock-
ings, the clocks of which were spangled with gold, and pumps tied
with ribbon.”—(Account of the First Battle betweenliumphries and
Mendoza.)—The epistle which Humphries wrote to a friend, com-
municating the result of this fight, is worthy of a Lacedaemonian.—
“Sir, I have dont the Jew, and am in good health. Rich. Hum-
phries.”
•	Tog and kicks, coat and breeches.—Tog is one of the cant words,
which Dekker cites, as 44 retaining a certain salt and tasting of
some wit and learning,1’ being derived irom the Latin, toga,
f Hands.
+ Mr. Jackson’s residence is in Pimlico.—This gentleman (as lie
well deserves to be called, from the correctness of his coiiduct and
the4>eculiar urbanity of his manners) forms that useful link be-
tween the amateurs and the professors of pugilism, which, when
broken, it will be difficult, if not wholly impossible, to replace.
$ Stripped.
For they saw, notwithstanding Crib’s honest en-
deavour
To train down the crummy,* ’twas monstrous as ever!
Not so with Lon 6 Sandy —prime meat every inch—
Which» of course, made the Gnostics f on t'other
side flinch y
And Bob W—ls—n from Southwark, the gamest
chap there,
Was now heard to sing out, “ Ten to oneon the Bear !M
First Round. Very cautious*—the kiddies both
sparred
As if shy of the scratch—while the Porpus kept guard
O’er his beautiM mug,'i as if fearing to hazard
One damaging touch in so dandy a mazzard.
Which t’other observing put in his One-Two §
Between Georgy's left ribs, with a knuckle so true*
·	Fat.	f	Knowing	ones.	χ	Face.
§ Two blows succeeding each other rapidly.—'Ilius (speaking of
Randall) “his one-two are putin with the sharpness of lightning.*
That had his heart lain in the right place, no doubt
But the Bear’s double-knock would have rummag’d
it out—
As it toas, Master Georo y came souse with the whack»
And there sprawl’d, like a turtle turn’d queer on ita
back.
Second Round. Rather sprightly—the Bear, in
high g'g’
Took a fancy to flirt with the Porpus’s wig;
And, had it been either a loose tye or bob,
He’d have claw'd it clean off, but ’twas glued to his
nob.
So he tipp'd him a settler they call “ a Spoil-Dandy”
Full plump in the whisker.—High betting on Sandy.
Third Round. Somewhat slack—Georgy tried to
make play,
But his own victualling-office* stood much in the way f
*	The stomach or paunch.
While Sandy's long arms—long enough for a douse
All the way from Kamschatka to Johnny Groat’s
House—
Kept paddling about the poor Porpus’s muns,*
Till they made him as hot and as cross as Lent buns! f
Fourth Round. Georgy’s backers look’d blank
at the lad,
When they saw what a rum knack of shifting \ he
had—
An old trick of his youth—but the Bear, up to sluing
Follow’d close on my gentleman, kneading his crum
As expertly as any Dead Man || about town,
All the way to the ropes—where, as Georgy went
down,
•	Mouth.	f	Hot	cross	buns.
X “ Some have censured shifting as an unmanly custom.”—Box-
iana.
§ Humbug or gammon.
|| Dead men are Bakers—so callcd from the loaves falsely
Sandy tipp* d\Axn a dose of that kind, that, when ta ken,
It is n’t the stuff, but the patient that’s shaken.
Fifth Round. Georgy tried for his customer's
head—
(The part of Long Sandy, that’s softest, ’tis said;
And the chat is that Nap, when he had him in tow,
Found his knoudedge-box * always the first thing to
go) —
charged to their roaster’s customers.—The following is from an
Account of the Battle fought by Nosworthy, the Baker, with Martin
the Jew.	.
“ First round. Nosworthy, on the alert, planted a tremendous
hit on Martin’s mouth, which not only drawed forth a profusion of
clai'et, but he went down.—Loud shouting from the Dead Men!
“ Second round. Nosworthy began to serve the Jew in style,
and his hits told most tremendously. Marlin made a good round
of it, but fell rather distressed. The Dead Men now opened their
mouths wide, and loudly offered six to four on the Master of the
Roils."
•	The head.
Neat milling this Ron nd —what with clouts on the nob,
Home hits in the bread-basket,* clicks in the gob,\
And plumps in the daylights, X a prettier treat
Between two Johnny Ram§ His not easy to meet.
Sixth ΚοϋΝο. Georgy’s friends in high flourish,
and hopes ·,
Jack Eld—n, with others, came dose to the ropes—
And when Georgy, one time, got the head of the Bear
Into Chancery,\\ Eld—n sung out “keep him there;”
But the cull broke away, as he would from Lob’s ^
pound,	I
And after a rum sort of rtiffianing Round	>
Like cronies they hugg9d9 and came smack to the 1
ground·,	J
#	The stomach. t The month. $ The eyes. § Novices.
|| Getting the head under the arm, for the purpose offibbing.
T A prison.—Sec Dr. Grey’s explanation of this phrase in his
notes upon Hudihras.
Poor Sandy the undermost, smothered and spread
Like a German, tuck’d under his huge feather bed !*
All pitied the patient—and loud exclamations,
“ My eyes /” and u my xmg Γ spoke the general
sensations-—
’Twas thought Sandy’s soul was squeezed out of hts
corpus,
So heavy the crush.—Two to one on the Porpus /
Nota bene.—’Twas curious to see all the pigeons
Sent off by Jews, Flashmen, and other religions,
To office, f with all due dispatch, through the air,
To the Bulls of the Alley the fate of the Beaiv—
*	The Germans sleep between two beds; and it is related that
an Irish traveller, upon finding a feather bed thus laid over him,
took it into his head that the people slept in strata, one upon the
other, and said to the attendant, “ will you be good enough to tell
the gentleman or lady, that is to lie over.me, to make haste, as I
want to go asleep?”
t To signify by letter.
(For in these Fancy times, His your hits in the muns
And your choppers, andfloorers, that govern the Funds)
And Consols, which had been all day shy enough,
When ’twas known in the Alley that Old Blue I
and Buff	>
Had been down on the Bear, rose at onee—up to I
snuffI*	J
Seventh Round. Though hot-press'd, and as flat
as a crumpet,
LongS andy show’dgflrme again, scorning to rump it;
And, fixing his eye on the Porpus’s snout,f
Which he knew that Adonis felt peery J about,
By a feint, truly elegant, tipp’d him a punch in
The critical place, where he cupboards his luncheon,
Which knock’d all the rich Curagoa into cruds9
And doubled him up> like a bag of old duds! §
*	This pliraee, denoting elevation of various kinds, is often ren-
dered more emphatic by such adjuncts as “ Up to snuff and tue-
penny”—“ Up to smiff, and a pinch above it” &c. &c.
t Nose.	J	Suspicious.	§	Clothes.
There he lay, almost frummagem'd ■*—every one said
Twas all Dicky with Georgy, his mug hung so dead:
And ’twas only by calling “ your wife, Sir, your wife !*’
(As a man would cry " fire!”) they could start him
to life.
tJp he rose in afunk,\ lapp'd a toothful of brandy,
And to it again.—Any odds upon Sandy.
Eighth Round· Sandy work’d like a first-rate
demolisher;
Bear as he is, yet his lick is no polisher;
And, take him at ruffianing work, (though, in com-
mon, he
Hums about Peace and all that9 like a Domine \)
*	Choaked.	t	Fright.
X A Parson.—Thus in that truly classical song, the Christening
of Little Joey:
« When Domme had nam'd the Kid
Then home again they ptA*d it;
A fiadi of lightning was prepared
For every one that lik’d it.”
Sandy’s the boy, if once to it they fall,
That will play up old gooseberry soon with them all.
ThisRound was but short—after humouring awhile,
He proceeded to serve an ejectment, in etyle* I
Upon Georgy's front grinders*, which damag'd Γ
hie smile	'
So completely, that bets ran a hundred to ten
The Adonis would ne’er flash his ivory f again—
And ’twas pretty to see him roll'd round with the
shock,
Like a cask of fresh blubber in old Greenland Dock!
Ninth Round. One of George’s bright ogles X
was put
On the bankruptcy list, with its shop-windows shut;
While the other soon made quite as tag-rag a show,
All rimm'd round with black, like the Conner in woe !
*	Teeth.	t	Show his teeth.	t	Eyes.
Much alarm was now seen ’mong the Israelite Kids,
And B—r—o,—the devils awn boy for the quids, *—
Dispatch’d off a pigeon (the species, no doubt,
That they call B—r—g’s stock-dove) with word
«to sell out.”
From this to the finish, ,twas all fiddlefaddle—
Poor Georgy, at last, could scarce hold up his daddle—
With grinders dislodg’d, and with peepers both
poach'd, f
’Twas not till theTenthRoundhisc/ar^t was broach'd:
As the cellarage lay so deep down in the fat,
Like his old M—**a*s puree, ’twas curs’d hard to
get at.
But a pelt in the smellers § (too pretty to shun,
If the lad eYen could) set it going like fun;
•	Money.
t French cant; Les yeux pochfr au baurre noir.—See the Die·
tioamure Comique.
J Blood.	$	The	ooac.
And this being the first Royal Claret let flow,
Since Tom took the Holy Alliance in totv,
The uncorking produced much sensation about,
As bets had been flush on the first painted snout.
Nota bene.—A note was wing’d off to the Square
Just to hint of this awful phlebotomy there;—
Bob Gregson, whose wit at such things is exceeding,*
Inclosing a large sprig of (< Love lies a bleeding f”
In short, not to dwell on eachfacer and fall, %
Poor Georgy was done up in no time at all,	>
And his spunkiest backers were forc’d to sing small.fJ
In vain did they try to fig up the old lad,
’Twas like using persuaders J upon a dead prad; §
In vain || Bogy B—ck—oh—m fondly besought him,
To show like himself, if not game, at least bottom;
•	Some specimens of Mr. Gregson's lyrical talents are given in
the Appendix, No. 4.
t To be humbled or abashed. $ Spurs. $ Horse.
|| For the meaning of this term, see Grote.
While Μ—bl—y, that very great Count, stood de-
ploring
He had n’t taught Georgy his new modes of boring:*
All useless—no art can transmogrify truth—
It was plain the conceit was mill'd out of the youth·
In the Twelfth and Last Round Sandy fetch’d him
a downer,
That left him all’s one as cold meat for the Crowner; f
On which the whole Populace flash'd the white grin
Like a basket of chips, and poor Georgy gave in .· J
While the fiddlers (old Potts having tipp'd them a
bandy ) §
Play’d <rGreen grow thzrushes,"\\ in honour of Sandy !
•	“ The ponderosity of Crib, when in close quarters with his
opponent, evidently bored in upon him, &c.”
t The Coroner.
fThe ancient Greeks had a phrase of similar structure,
ceao.
$ A bandy or cripple, a sixpence; “ that piece being commonly
much bent and distorted.”—Grose.
I	The well-known compliment paid to the Emperor of all the
Ruuiat by some Irish musicians.
what say your Majesties ?—is n’t this prime f
Was t£*ere ever ^renc^ Bulletin half so sublime?
Or cot^d old Nap himself, in his glory,* have wish’d
To sfcow UP a	Gemman more handsomely dish'd?—
bleSS your great hearts, let them say what they will,
Notlxiog 9& half 80 gcntcd 818 a regular Mill;
^<1, -for settling of balances, all I know is
>Tis the way Caleb Baldwin prefers settling Aw.f
for backers, you’ve lots of Big-tvigs about Court,
^^^villiacityou—thera/beingtiredofthatsport,—
•	See Appendix, No. 5.
t K trifling instance of which is recorded in Boxiana. * A
fracas occurred betweeu Caleb Baldwin and the keepers of the gate.
The latter, not immediately recognizing the veteran of the rrng,
' refused his vehicle admittance, without the usual tip; but Caleb,
finding arg**fymg the topic would not do, instead of paying them
in the new coinage, dealt out another sort of currency, and although
destitute of the W. W. P. it had such an instantaneous effect
upon the Johnny Raws, that the gate flew open, and Caleb rode
through in triumph.’
And if quids should be wanting» to make the match
good,
There *s B—κ—ng, the Prince of Rag Rhino, who
stood
(T’other day, you know) bail for the seedy* Right
Liners $
Who knows but, if coax’d, he may shell out the
shiners ? f
The shiners!Lord, Lord, what a bounce do 1 say! Λ
As if we could hope to have rags done away, >
Or see any thing shining, while Van has the sway! J
• *
As to training, a Court’s but a rum sort of station
To choose for that sober and chaste operation J j
*	Poor.
t Produce the guineas.
X The extreme rigour, in these respetts, of the ancient system of
training may be inferred from the instances mentioned by JElian.
Not only pugilists, but even players on the harp, were, during
the rime of their probation, avwaMQ αμιώας χλι απ^ρο*. De Ani-
mal, Lib. 6. cap. 1.
For, as old Ikky Pig * Said of Courts, “ by de hea-
vens,
Dey’re all, but the Fives Court, at sixes and sevens”
What with snoozing,\ high grubbing, J and guzzling
like Cloe9 ·
Your Majesties, pardon me, all get so doughy,
That take the whole kit, down from Sandy the Bear
To him who makes duds for the Virgin to wear,
I’d choose but Jack Scroggins, and feel disappointed
If Jack didn’t tell out the whole Lord's Anointed!.
But, barring thesg nat’ral defects, (which, I feel,
My remarking on thus may be thought ungenteel)
And allowing for delicate jams,§ which have merely
Been handling the sceptre, and that, too, but queerly,
*	A Jew, so nick-named^—one of the Big ones. He was beaten
by Crib on Black heath, in the year 1805.
t Sleeping,
t Feeding.
§ Fans or fambles, hands.
Vm not without hopes, and would stand a tight bet,
That l'll make something game of your Majesties yet·
So, say but the word—if you’re up to the freak, \
Let ushave a prime match of it, Greek against Greek, f
And I’ll put you on beefsteaks and sweating next I
week—	J
While, for teaching you every perfection, that throws a
Renown upon milling—the tact of Mendoza—
The charm, by which Humphries* contriv’d to infuse
The three Graces themselves into all his One- Two's—
The nobbers of Johnson f—Big Ben’s J banging
brain-blows—
The weaving of Sam, § that turn’d faces to rainbows—
•	Humphries was called " The Gentleman Boxer.” He was
(says the author of Boxiana) remarkably graceful, and his attitudes
were of the most elegant and impressive nature.
t Tan Johnson, who, till his fight with Big Ben, was hailed as
the Champion of England.
{ Ben Brain, alias Big Ben, wore the honours of the Champion-
ship till his death.
§ Dutch Sam, a hero, of whom all the lovers of the Fancy speak,
Digitized by £gogle
Old Corcoran’s click,* that laid customers flat—
Paddy Ryak from Dublin's * renown’d “ coup de
Patr
And my own improv’d method of tickling a rib,
You may always command
Your devoted
Tom Crib.
as the Swedes do of Charles the Twelfth, with tears in their
eyes.
*	Celebrated Irish pugilists.
APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.
No. 1.
Account of a Grand Pugilistic Meeting, held at Bel-
cher's, (Castle Tavern, Holborn) Tom Crib in the
Chair, to take into consideration the propriety of
sending Representatives of the Fancy to Congress·—
Extracted from a letter written on the occasion by
Harry Harrner the Hammerer,* to Ned Painter.
Αλλ’ to KAN
Λϋ-ψ», iw( αν
Tor nywita αχαση TftM.t
*	* * * * * *
LAST Friday night a bang-up set
Of milling blades at Belcher's met j
*	So called in his double capacity of Boxer and Coppersmith.
t The passage in Pindar, from which the following lines of
*' Hark, the merry Christ Church Bells” are evidently borrowed.
The devil a man
Will leave his can,
Till he hears the Mighty Tom.
All high-bred Heroes of the Ring,
Whose very gammon would delight one j
Who, nurs’d beneath The Fancy's wing,
Show all her feathers—but the white one.
Brave Tom, the Champion, with an air
Almost Corinthian9* took the Chair;
And kept the Coves f in quiet tune,
By shewing such afist of mutton
As, on a Point of Order, soon
Would take the shine from Speaker Sutton.
And all the lads look’d gay and bright,
And gin aqd genius flash’d about,
And whosoe’er grew unpolite,
The well-bred Champion serv'd him out.
*	?. e. With the air, almost, of a man of rank and fashion. In-
deed, according to Horace’s notions of a peerage, Tom’s claims to
it are indisputable.
...... illum superare pugni?
Nobilem.
t Fellows.
As we’d been summon’d thus, to quaff
Our Deady * o’er some State Affairs,
Of course we mix’d not with the raff,
But had the Sunday room, up stairs.
And when we well had sluic'd our gobs,
'Till all were in prime twig for chatter,
Tom rose, and to our learned nobs
Propounded thus th* important matter:—
M Gemmensays he—Tom’s words, you know,
Come, like his hitting, strong but slow—
“ Seeing as how those Swells, that made
“ Old Boney quit the hammering trade,
ie (All Prime Ones in their own conceit,)
“ Will shortly at the Congress meet—
ft (Some place that’s like the Finish J, lads,
“ Where all your high pedestrian pads,
•	Deady’s gin, otherwise, Deady’s brilliant stark naked.
f Had drunk heartily.
t A public-liouse in Covent-Garden, memorable as one of the
d 2
“ That have been tip and out all night,
“ Running their rigs among the rattlers,*
“ At morning meet, and,—honour bright,—
“ Agree to share the blunt and tatlers!) f
“ Seeing as how, 1 say, these Swells
“ Are soon to meet, by special summons,
“ To chime together, like " hell's bells”
“ And laugh at all mankind, as rum ones—
“ 1 see no reason, when such things
“ Are going on among these Kings,
“ Why We, who’re of the Fancy lay, J
“ As dead hands at a mill as they,
places, where the Gentlemen Depredators of the night (the Holy
League of the Road) meet, early in the morning, for the purpose
of sharing the spoil, and arranging other matters connected with
their most Christian Alliance.
*	Robbing travellers in chaises, &c.
t The money and watches.
X Particular pursuit or enterprize. Thus, “ he is on the hid-
lay,” i. e. stopping children with parcels and robbing them—the
Jten-crack lay, house-breaking, ficc. ficc.
u And quite as ready, ajier it,
“ To share the spoil and grab the bit *,
“ Should not be there, to join the chat,
“ To see, at least, what fun they’re at,
“ And help their Majesties to find
“ New inodes of punishing mankind.
** What say you, lads ? is any spark
“ Among you ready for a lark f
“ To this same Congress ?—Caleb, Joe,
4t Bill, Bob, what say you ?—yes, or no V9
Thus spoke the Champion, Prime of men,
And loud and long we cheer'd his prattle
With shouts, that thunder’d through the ken, i
And made Tom’s Sunday tea-things rattle!
•	To seize the money,
t A frolic or party of pleasure.
X House.
A pause ensued—'till cries of w Gregson1*
Brought Bob, the Poet, on his legs soon—
(My eyes, how prettily Bob writes!
Talk of your Camels, Hogs, and Crabs,*
And twenty more such Pidcock frights—
Bob’s worth a hundred of these dabs :
For a short turn up t at a sonnet,
A round of odes, or Pastoral bout9
All Lombard-street to nine-pence on it, {
Bobby’s the boy would dean them out /)
*	By this curious zoological assemblage (something like Berm’s
“ porci, e poeti, e pidGi^M'’) the writer means, I suppose, Messrs·
Campbell, Crabbe and Hogg.	-
t A turn-up is properly a casual and hasty set-to.
X More usually u Lombard-street to a China orange.** There
are several of these fanciful forms of betting—“ Chelsea College
to a sentry-box,” u Pompey*s Pillar to a stick of sealing-wax,”
&c. &c.
“ Gemmensays he—(Bob’s eloquence
Lies much in C—nn—g’s line, ’tis said,
For, when Bob can’t afford us sense,
He tips us poetri/9 instead—)
“ Gemmen, before I touch the matter,
€i On which I’m here had up for patter, ·
“ A few short words I first must spare,
“ To him, the Hero, that sits there,
“ Swigging Blue Ruin, f in that chair.
“ (Hear—hear)—His fame I need not tell,
“ For that, my friends, all England’s loud with
“ But this 1*11 say, a driller Swell
“ I’d never wish to bloto a cloud% with!”	.
At these brave words, we, ev’ry one,
Sung out “ hear—hear”—and dapp’d, likefun.
•	Talk.	t	Gin.
$ To smoke a pipe. This phrase is highly poetical, and ex
plains what Homer meant by the epithet, νιφιληγίριτης-
For, knowing how, on Moulsey’s plain,
The Championfibb'd the poet's nob,*
This buttering-up, f against the grain,
We thought was curs’d genteel in Bob.
And, here again, we may remark
Bob’s likeness to the Lisbon jobber— %
For, though, all know, that flashy spark
From C—st—r—gh receiv’d a nobber,
That made him look like sneaking Jerry,
And laid him up in ordinary, §
Yet, now, such loving pals || are they,
That GBORGY.^wiser as he’s older,
Instead offacing C—st—r—gh,
Is proud to be his bottle-holder!
*	In the year 1808, when Crib defeated Gregson.
t· Praising or flattering.
t These parallels between great men are truly edifying.
$ Sea cant—a good deal of which has been introduced into the
regular Flash» by such classic heroes as Scroggins, Crockey, &c.
|| Friends.
But to return to Bob's harangue,
’Twas deuced fine—no slum or slang—	‘
But such as you could smoke the bard in,—
All full offlowers, like Common Garden,
With lots offigures, neat and bright,
Like Mother Salmon's—wax-work quite !
The next was Turner—nobbing Ned—
Who put his right leg forth, * and said,
“ Tom, 1 admire your notion much;
“ And, please the pigs, if well and hearty,
“ I somehow thinks I’ll have a touch,
“ Myself, at this said Congress party.
“ Though no great shakes at learned chat,
“ If settling Europe be the sport,
*	Ned’s favourite Pro/fgomeua in battle as well as in debate.
As this position is said to render him “ very hard to be got at,”
I	would recommend poor Mr. V—ns—t—t to try it as a last re-
source, in his next set-to with Mr. T—rn—y.
“ They’ll find I’m just the boy for that,
“ As tipping settlers* is my forte !”
Then up rose Ward, the veteran Job,
And, ’twixt his whiffe, f suggested briefly
That but a Jew, at first, should go,
And those, the light-weight Gemmen chiefly;
As if t& many “ Big ones” went,
They might alarm the Continent! !
Joe added, then, that, as 'twas known
The R—g—t, bless his wig! had shown
A taste for Art, (like Joey’s own {)
•	A kind of blow, whose sedative nature is sufficfcntfy explained
by the name it bears.
t Joe being particularly fond of “ that costly and gentlemanlike
smoke** as Dekker c*Ue it. The talent which Joe possesses of
uttering Flath while he nwfa» 1 “	dare	lueemF^ia	very
remarkable.
t Joe's taste for pictures has been thus commemorated by the
And meant, ’mong other sporting things,
To have the heads of all those Kings,
And conqu’rors, whom he loves so dearly,
Taken off—on canvas, merely;
God forbid the other mode!—
He (Joe) would from his own abode,
(The Dragon *—fam’d for Fancy works,
Drawings of Heroes, and of—corks)
great Historian of Pugilism—** If Joe Ward cannot boast of a
splendid gallery of pictures formed of selections from the great
foreign masters, he can sport such a collection of native subjects
as, in many instances, must be considered unique. Portraits of
nearly all the pugilists (many of them in whole lengths and atti-
tudes) are to be found, from the days of Figg and Broughton
down to the present period, with likenesses of many distinguished
amateurs, among whom are Captain Barclay, the classic Dr.
Johnson, the Duke of Cumberland, &c. His parlour is decorated
in a similar manner; and his partiality for pictures has gone so far,
that even the &£-room contains many excellent subjects!1*—Box·
iana, vol. i. p. 43.L
*	The Green Dragon, King-street, near Swallow-street, “ where
Furnish such Gemmen of the Fist, *
As would complete the R—g—t’s list.
** Thus, Champion Tom/* said he, “ would look
“ Right well, hung up beeide the Duke—■
u Tom’s noddle being (if its frame
“ Had but the gilding) much the same—
“ And, as a partner for Old Blu,
u Bill Gibbons or myself would do.”
Loud cheering at this speech of Joey’s—
Who, as the Dilettanti know, is
(says the same author) any person may have an opportunity of
verifying what has been asserted in viewing Ward's Cabinet of the
Fancy/'*	·
*	Among the portraits is one of BillGirbons, by a pupil of the
great Fuseli, which gave occasion to the following impromptu:—
Though you are one of Fuseli’s scholars,
This questiou I'll dare to propose,—
How the devil could you use water-colours,
In painting Bill Gibbons's nose?
(With all his other learned parts,)
Down as a hammer * to the Arts!
Old Bill, the Black, f—you know him, Neddy—
(With mug X, whose hue the ebon shames,
Reflected in a pint of Deady,
Like a large Collier in the Thames)
Though somewhat cut, § just begg’d to say
He hop'd that Swell, Lord C—st—R—gh,
Would show the Ldly- Whites || fair play 5
*	To be doom to any thing is pretty much the same as being up
to it, and “ down as a hammer” is, of course, the intensivum of the
phrase.
t Richmond.	\	Face.	,
§ Cut, tipsy; another remarkable instance of the similarity that
exists between the language of the Classics and that of St. Giles’s.—
In Martial we find “ Incaluit quoties saucia vena mero.9* Ennius,
too, has “sauciavit se flore Liberiand Justin “ hesterno mero
taucii.”
II	Lily-xchites, (or Srunc-balls) Negroes.
i6 And not—as once he did”—says Bill,
** Among those Kings, so high and squirish,
“ Leave us, poor Blacks, to fare as ill,
(i As if we were but pigs, or—Irish !’*
Bill Gibbons, rising, wish’d to know
Whether *twas meant his Butt should go—
(t As should their Majesties be dull,”
Says Bill, “ there’s nothing like a Bull :*
" And blm me tight”— (Bill Gibbons ne’er
In all his days was known to swear,
Except light oaths, to grace his speeches,
Like “ dash my trig,” or u bum my breeches P1)
“ Blow me—”
*	Bill Gibbons has, I believe, been lately rivalled in this pe-
culiar Walk of the Fancy, by the superior merits of Tom Oliver’s
Game Bull.
—Just then, the Chair,* already
Grown rather lively with the Deady,
********
*	From the respect which I bear to all sorts of dignitaries, and
my unwillingness to meddle with the “ imputed weaknesses of
the great,” I have been induced to suppress the remainder of this
detail.
No. 2.
Virgil, J&neid. Lib. v. 4. 26.
Constitit in digitos extemplo arrectus uterque,
Brachiaque ad superas interritus extulit auras.
Abduxere retr6 longe capita ardua ab ictu:
Immiscentque manus manibus, pugnamque laces-
sunt.
Ille, pedum melior motu, fretusque juventa:
Hic, membris et mole valens;
No. ».
Account of the Milling-match between Entellus and
Dares, translated from the Fifth Booh of the
JEneid,
•	BY	OKS	OF	THE FANCY.
WITH daddies* high uprais’d, and nob held back,
In awful prescience of th’ impending thwack,
Both Kiddiesf stood—and with prelusive spar,
And light manoeuvring, kindled up the war!
The One, in bloom of youth—alight-weight blade— Λ
The Other, vast, gigantic, as if made,	>
Express, by Nature for the hammering trade; J
*	Hands.	‘
t Fellows, usually young follows.
sed tarda trementi
Genua labant, vastos quatit aeger anhelitus artus.
Multa viri nequicquam inter se vulnera jactant,
Multa cavo lateri ingeminant, et pectore vastos
Dant sonitus: erratque aures et tempora circum
Crebra manus: duro crepitant sub vulnere malae.
Stat gravis Entellus, nisuque immotus eodem,
Corpore tela modd atque oculis vigilantibus exit.
But aged,* slow, with stiff limbs, tottering much,
And lungs, that lack’d the bellows-mender's touch.
Yet, sprightly to the Scratch both Buffers came,
While ribbers rung from each resounding frame,
And divers digs, and many a ponderous
Were on their broad bread-baskets heard and felt.
With roving aim, but aim that rarely miss’d,
Round lugs and ogles f flew the frequent fist j
While showers of facers told so deadly well,
That the crush’d jaw-bones crackled as they fell!
But firmly stood Entellus—and still bright,
Though bent by age, with all The Fancy's light,
*	Macrobius, in bis explanation of the various properties of the
number Seven, says, that the fifth Hebdomas of man’s life (the age
of 35) is the completion of his strength; that therefore pugilists, if
not successful, usually give over their profession at that time.
“ Inter pugiles denique haec consuetudo conservatur, ut quos jam
coronavere victoris, nihil de se amplius in incrementis virium spe·
rent; qui vero expertes hujus gloriae usque illo manserunt, a pro-
fessione discedant.” In Somn. Scip. Lib. 1.
f Ears and eycs.
Ille, velut celsam oppugnat qui molibus urbem,
Aut montana sedet circum castella sub armis;
Nunc hos, nunc illos aditus, omnemque pererrat
Arte locum, et variis assultibus irritus urget.
Ostendit dextram insurgens Entellus, et alte
Extulit 5 ille ictum venientem έ vertici velox
Praevidit, celerique elapsus corpore cessit.
Entellus vires in ventum effudit, et ultro
Ipse gravis graviterque ad terram pondere vasto
Stopp'd with a skill, and rallied with a fire
Th’ Immortal Fancy could alone inspire!
While Dares, shifting round, with looks of thought,
An opening to the Cove's huge carcase sought,
(Like General Preston, in that awful hour,
When on one leg he hopp’d to—take the Tower!)
And here, and there, explor’d with active fin %	\
And skilful feint, some guardless pass to win, >
And prove a boring guest when on?e let in. J
And now Entellus, with an eye that plann'd
Punishing deeds, high rais’d his heavy hand ;
But, ere the sledge came down, young Dakes spied
Its shadow o’er his brow, and slipp’d aside—
So nimbly slipp'd, that the vain nobber pass'd
Through empty air; and He, so high, so vast,
* Am.
Concidit; uf quondam cava concidit/aut Erymantho*
Aut Id& in magn&, radicibus eruta pinus.
Consurgunt studiis Teucri et Trinacria pubes:
It clamor coelo \ primusque accurrit Acestes
^Equaevumque ab humo miserans attollit amicum,
Who dealt the stroke, came thundering to the
ground!—
Not B—ck—oh—m, himself, with bulkier sound,*
Uprooted from the field of Whiggish glories,
Fell souse, of late, among the astonish’d .Tories! f
Instant the Ring was broke, and shouts and yells
From Trojan Flashmen and Sicilian Swells
Fill'd the wide heav’n—while, touch'd with grief to
see	.
His pal, X well-known through many a lark and
spree, §
*	As the uprooted trunk In the original is said to be '* cava,”
the epithet here ought, perhaps, to be “ hollower sound·*
fl trust ray conversion of the Erymanthian pine into his
L—ds—p will be thought happy and ingenious. It was suggested,
indeed, by the recollection that Erymanthus was also famous for
another sort of natural production, very common in society at all
periods, and which no one but Hercules ever seems to have known
how to manage. Though even he is described by Valerius Flac-
cus as—“ Erymanthei sudantem pondere monstri/*
X Friend.	§	Party	of	pleasure	and	frolic.
At non tardatus casu, neque territus heros j
Acrior ad pugnam redit, ac yim suscitat ira;
Tum pudor incendit vires, et conscia virtus;
Fraedpitemque Daren ardens agit aequore toto;
Nunc dextri ingeminans ictus, nunc ille sinistri.
Thus rumly floor'd, the kind Acestes ran,
And pitying rais’d from earth the game old man.
Uncow’d, undamag’d to the sport he came.
His limbs all muscle, and his soul all flame.
The memory of his milling glories past,
The shame, that aught but death should see him
grass'd,
All fir’d the veteran's pluck—with fury flush'd
Full on his light-limb’d customer he rush'd,
And hammering right and left, with ponderous swing,*
Ruffian'd the reeling youngster round the Ring— -
*	This phrase is but too applicable to the round hitting of the
ancients, who, it appears by the engravings in Mercurialis de Art.
Gymnast, knew as little of our straight-forward mode as the un-
initiated Irish of the present day. I have, by the by, discovered
some errors in Mercurialis, as well as in two other modern authors
upon Pugilism (τίζ. Petrus Faber, in his Agonisticon, and that
indefatigable classic antiquary, M. Burette, in his “ Mcmoire pour
servir k l’Histoire du Pugilat des Anciens”) which I shall have the
pleasure of pointing oat iu my forthcoming “ Parallel.”
Nec mora, nec requies: quam multi grandine nimbi
Culminibus crepitant, sic densis ictibus heros
Creber utr&que manu pulsat versatque Dareta.
Tum pater <£neas procedere longi&s iras,
Et saevire animis Entellum haud passus acerbis;
Sed finem imposuit pugnae, fessumque Dareta
Eripuit, mulcens dictis, ac talia fatur.
Infelix! quae tanta animum dementia cepit?
Non vires alias, conversaque numina sentis ?
Cede Deo·
Nor rest, nor pause, nor breathing-time was given.
But, rapid as the rattling hail from heav*n
Beats on the house-top, showers of Randal’s shot ·
Around the Trojan’s lugs flew, peppering hot 2
’Till now .£neas, fill’d with anxious dread,
Rush’d in between them, and, with words well-bred,
Preserv’d alike the peace and Dares* head,
Both which the veteran much inclin’d to break—
Then kindly thus the punish’d youth bespake:
" Poor Johnny Raw / what madness could impel
“ So rum a Flat to face so prime a Swell?
te See’st thou not, boy, the Fancy, heavenly Maid,
“ Herself descends to this great Hammerer's aid,
“ And, singling him from all herflash adorers,
“ Shines in his hits, and thunders in his floorers ?
“ Then, yield thee, youth,—nor such a spooney be,
fi To think mere man can mill a Deity!”
•	A favourite blow of the Nonpareil's, to caUed·
Dixitque, et praelia voce diremit.
Ast illum fidi aequales, genua aegra trahentem
Jactantemque utroque caput, crassumque cruorem
Ore rejectantem, mixtosque in sanguine dentes
Ducunt ad naves.
Thus spoke the Chief—and now, the scrimmage o'er,
His faithful pals the done-up Dares bore
Back to his home, with tottering gams, sunk heart,
And muns and noddle pink'd in every part.*
While from his gob the guggling claret gush’d,
And lots of grinders, from their sockets crush'd, r
Forth with the crimson tide in rattling fragments (
rush’d!	'
•	There are two or three Epigrams in the Greek Anthology*
ridiculing the state of mutilation and disfigurement to which the
pugilists were reduced by their combats. The following four
lines are from an Epigram by Lucillius, Lib. 2.
Komum *i Χΐφαλη σν, Αιτολλοφανι;, ytymrcu,
Η των σητοχοηντ βν£λαρι*τ τα χατιυ.
Ονίως μνρμφιωΨ τρυιτημαΐα λοξά nat οξθα,
ΓραμμαΊα tw» Xvftxwr Avita χαι Φρνγια·
Literally, as follows: “ Thy head, O Apollophanes, is perforated
like a sieve, or like the leaves of an old worm-eaten book; and the
numerous scars, both straight and cross-ways, which have been
left upon thy pate by the cstus, very much resemble the score of
a Lydian or Phrygian piece of music.11 Periphrastically, thus:
Your noddle, dear Jack, full of holes like a sieve,
Is so figur'd, and dotted, and scratch'd, I declare,
By your customer«* fists, one would almost believe
They had punch'd a whole verse of “ The Woodpecker” there!
It ought to be mentioned, that the word punching" is used
both in boxing and music-engraving.
No. 8.
As illustrative of the Noble Lord’s visit to Congress, I take the
liberty of giving the two following pieces of poetry, which
appeared some time since in the Morning Chronicle, and which
are from the pen, I suspect, of that facetious Historian of the
Fudges, Mr. Thomas Brown, the Younger.
LINES
ON THE DEPARTURE OF LORDS C—ST—H—GH
AND ST—W—RT FOR THE CONTINENT.
At Paris* et Fratres, et qui rapuere sub illis
Vix tenu£re manus (scis hoc, Menelae) nefandas.
Ooid. Metam. Lib. 13. v. 202.
GO, Brothers in wisdom—go, bright pair of Peers,
And may Cupid and Fame fan you both with
their pinions!
The One, the best lover we have—of his years,
And the other Prime Statesman of Britain's do-
minions.
*	Ovid is mistaken in saying that it was * at Paris” these
rapacious transactions took placc—we should read “ at Vienna.”
Go, Hero of Chancery, blest with the smile
Of the Misses that love, and the monarchs that
prize thee $
Forget Mrs. Ang—lo T—yl—r awhile,
And all tailors but him who so well dandifies thee.
Never mind how thy juniors in gallantry scoff,
Never heed how perverse affidavits may thwart
thee,
But shew the young Misses thou ’rt scholar enough
To translate “ Amor Fortis” a love, about forty !
And sure ’tis no wonder, when, fresh as young Mars,
From the battle you came, with the Orders you’d
earn’d in’t,
That sweet Lady Fanny should cry out<€ my stars!"
And forget that the Moon, too, was some way
concern’d in't.	.
For not the great R—g—τ himself has endur’d
(Though I’ve seen him with badges and orders all
shine,
Till he look’d like a house that was over insur’d)
A much heavier burthen of glories than thine.
And *tis plain, when a wealthy young lady so mad is,
Or any young ladies can so go astray,
As to marry old Dandies that might be their daddies.
The stars* are in fault, my Lord St—w—rt, not
they!
Thou, too, t’other brother, thou Tully of Tories,
Thou Malaprop Cicero, over whose lips
Such a smooth rigmarole about “ monarchs,” and
“ glories,”
And <€ nulltdge," fond “ features/' like syllabub slips.
*	*· When weak women go astray,
“ The stars are more in fault than they.”
f It is thus the noble Lord pronounces the word “ knowledge**—
Go, haste, at the Congress pursue thy vocation
Of adding fresh sums to this National Debt of ours,
Leaguing with Kings, who, for mere recreation,
Break promises, fast as your Lordship breaks
metaphors.
fare ye well, fare ye well, bright Pair of Peers,
And may Cupid and Fame fan you both with
their pinions!
The One, the best lover we have—of his years,
And the Other, Prime Statesman of Britain’s do-
minions.
deriving it, as far as his own share is concerned, from the Latin,
“ mill us.”
TO THE SHIP IN WHICH LORD C—ST—R—GH
SAILED FOR THE CONTINENT.
Imitated from Horace, Lib. 1. Ode S.
So may my Lady’s pray’rs prevail, *
And C—nn— g's too, and lucid Br—gge*s,
And Eld—n beg a favouring gale
From Eolus, that older Bags, f
To speed thee on thy destin'd way,
Oh ship, that bear'st our C—st—r—gh, f
*	Sic te Diva potens Cypri,
Sic fratres Helenae, lucida sidera,
Ventorumque regat pater,
f See a description of the ασκοί, or Bags of Eolus, in the Odys-
sey, Lib. 10.
X Navis, qu» tibi creditura
Debes Virgilium.
Our gracious R—g—t’s better half, *
And, therefore, quarter of a King—
(As Van, or any other calf,
May find, without much figuring.)
Waft him, oh ye kindly breezes,
Waft this Lord of place and pelf,
Any where his Lordship pleases,
Though ’twere to the D—1 himself!
Oh, wtat a face of brass was his, f
Who first at Congress show'd his phyz—
To sign away the Rights of Man
To Russian threats and Austrian juggle;
And leave the sinking African J
To fall without one saving struggle—
*	*	■■■	■	Anira®	dimidium	meum.
f Illi robur et aes triplex.	·
Circa pectus erat, qui, &£.
J----------praecipitem Africum
, Decertantem Aquilonibus.
'Mong ministers from North and South,
To shew his lack of shame and sense,
And hoist the Sign ofi( Bull and Mouth”
For blunders and for eloquence!
In vain we wish our Secs, at home*
To mind their papers, desks, and shelves,
If silly Secs, abroad mil roam
And make such noodles of themselves. .
But such hath always been the case—>
For matchless impudence of face,
There's nothing like your Tory race! f
•	Nequtcquam Deus abscidit
Prudens oceano dissociabili ..
Terras, si tamen impiae
Non tangenda Rates transiliunt vada.
This last line, we may suppose, alludes to some distinguished
Rut/ that attended the voyager.
I Audax omnia perpeti	*
Gens ruit per vetitum nefas.
First, Pitt,* the chos’n pf England, taught her
A taste for famine, fire, and slaughter.
Then came the Doctor, f for our ease,
With E—d—ns, Ch—th—ms, H—wk—B-r-^S,
And other deadly maladies.
When each, in turn, had run their rigs,
Necessity brought in the Whigs: J
And oh, I blush, I blush to say,
When these, in turn, were put to flight, too.
Illustrious T—mp—e flew away
With lots of pens he had no right to ! §
•	Audax Japeti genus
Ignem fraude mala gentibus intulit·
+ Post...... -	----------
-------macies, et nova febrium
Terris incubit cohors.
ί-----------tarda necessitas
Lethi corripuit gradum.
§ Expertus vacuum Daedalus aera
Pennis non homini datis.
This allusion to the 12001. worth of stationary, which bis Lord-
ship ordered, when on the point of vacating life place, is par-
ticularly happy. Ed.
In short, what tviU not mortal man do ? *
And now, that—strife and bloodshed past—
We've done on earth what harm we can do,
We gravely take to heav’n at last5 f
And think its favouring smile to purchase
(Oh Lord, good Lord! by—building churches!)
•	Nil mortalibus arduum est
ΐ Ccelum ipsum petimus stultitia.
No. 4.
BOB GREGSON*
POET LAUREATE -OF THE FANCY.
*' FOR hitting and getting avoay (says the elegant
Author of Boxiana) Richmond is distinguished j
and the brave Molineux keeps a strong hold in the
circle of boxerts, as a pugilist of the first class; while
the Champion of England stands unrivalled for his
punishment, game, and milling on the retreat /—but,
notwithstanding the above variety of qualifications,
it has been reserved for Bob Gregson, alone, from
his union of pugilism and poetry, to recount the
deeds of his Brethren of the Fist in heroic verse,
like the bards of old, sounding the praises of their
warlike champions.” The same author also adds,
that “ although not possessing the terseness and
originality of Dryden, or the musical cadence and
correctness of Pope, yet still Bob has entered into
his peculiar subject with a characteristic energy and
apposite spirit." Vol. 1. p. 357.
This high praise of Mr. Greg son’s talents is fully
borne out by the specimen which his eulogist has
given, page 358—«. very spirited Chaunt, or Nemean
ode, entitled “ British Lads and Black Millers”
The connexion between poetical and pugnacious
propensities seems to have been ingeniously adum-
brated by the ancients, in the bow with which they
armed Apollo:	*
Φαβω γαξ χαι TOSON {πιτξίπιται και ΑΟΙΔΗ.
Cullimach. Hymn. in Apollin. v. 44·
The same mythological bard informs us that,
when Minerva bestowed the gift of inspiration upon
Tiresias, slie also made him a present of a large
cudgel;
Δωσω wu ΜΕΓΑΒΑΚΤΡΟΝ:
another evident intimation of the congeniality sup-
posed to exist between the exercises of the Imagina-
tion and those of The Fancy. To na one at the
present day is the double wreath more justly due
than to Mr. Bob Gregson. In addition to his nu-
merous original productions, he has condescended
to give imitations of some of our living poets—
particularly of Lord Byron and Mr· Moore; and the
amatory style of the latter gentleman has been
caught, with peculiar felicity, in the following lines,
which were addressed some years ago, to Miss
Grace Maddox, a young Lady of pugilistic cele-
brity, of whom I have already made honourable
mention in the Preface.
LINES
TO MISS GRACE MADDOX, THE FAIR PUGILIST,
Written in imitation of the style of Moore,
BY BOB GREGSON, P. P.
Sweet Maid of the Fancy!—whose ogles,* adorning
That beautiful cheek, ever budding like bowers,
Are bright as the ^ems that the first Jew f of morning
Hawks round Covent-Garden, 'mid cart-loads of
flowers!
•	Eyes.
f By the trifling alteration of “ dew” into “ Jew,” Mr. Gregson
has contrived to collect the three cliicf ingredients of Moore's
poetry, viz. dews, gems, and flowers, into the short compass of
these two lines.	>
Oh Grace of the Graces! whose kiss to my lip
Is as sweet as the brandy and tea, rather thinnish,
That Knights of the Rumpad* so rurally sip,
At the first blush of dawn, in the Tap of theFinishlf
Ah, never be false to me, fair as thou art,
Nor belie all the many kind things thou hast said;
The falsehood of other nymphs touches the Heart,
But thy fibbing^ my dear, plays the dev’l with the
Head!
Yet, who would not prize, beyond honours and pelf,
A maid to whom Beauty such treasures has granted,
That, ah, she not only has black eyes, herself,
But can furnish a friend with a pair, too, if wanted!
*	Highwaymen.
f See Note, page 35. Brandy and tea is the favourite beverage
at the Finish.
Lord St—w—rt’s a hero (as many suppose)
And the Lady he woos is a rich and a rare one;
His heart is in Chancery, every one knows,
And 30 would his head be, if thou wert his fair one.
Sweet Maid of the Fancy! when love first came o’er
me,
I felt rather queerish, I freely confess;
But now I've thy beauties each moment before me,
The pleasure grows more, and the queerishness less,
Thus a new set of darbies,* when first they are worn,
Makes the Jail~bird f uneasy, though splendid
.	their	ray 5
But the links will lie lighter the longer they’re borno,
And the comfort increase, as the shine fades away!
*	Fetters.
f Prisoner.—This being the only bird in the whole range of
Ornithology, which the author of Lai la Hookh ha» not pressed
into his service, Mr. Gregson may consider himself very lucky in
being able to Uy hold of it.
I had hoped that it would have been in my power
to gratify the reader with several of Mr. Gregson’s
lyrical productions, but I have only been able to
procure copies of Two Songs, or Chaunts, which
were written by him for a Masquerade, or Fancy
Ball, given lately at one of the most fashionable
Cock-and-Hen Clubs in St. Giles’s. Though most
of the company were without characters, there were
a few very lively and interesting maskers; among
whom, we particularly noticed Bill Richmond, as
the Emperor ofHayii,* attended by Sutton, as a sort
of black Mr. V—ns—τ—τ $ and Ikey Pig made
an excellent L—s D—xh—τ. The beautiful Mrs.
Croc key,f who keeps the Great Rag Shop in Ber-
*	His Majesty (in a Song which 1 regret I cannot give) professed
his intentions
To take to strong measures like some of his kin—
To turn away Count Lemonade, and bring in
Λ more spirited ministry under Duke Gin!
f A relative of poor Crockey, who was tagged some time since.
mondsey, went as the Old Lady of Th read needle Street.
She was observed to flirt a good deal with the black
Mr. V—ns—t—t, but to do her justice, she guarded
her “ Hesperidum mala” with all the vigilance of a
dragoness. Jack Holmes,* the pugilistic Coach-
man, personated Lord C—st—r—gh, and sung in
admirable style	,
Ya-hip, my Hearties! here am I
That drive the Constitution Fly.
This Song (which was written for him by Mr.
Gregson, and in which the language and sentiments
of Coachee are transferred so ingeniously to the
Noble person represented) is as follows:
*	The same, I suppose, that served out Blake (alias Tom Tough)
some years ago, at Wilsden Green. The Fancy Gazette, on that
occasion, remarked, that poor Holmes’s face was “ rendered per·
fectly unintelligible”
YA-HIP, MY HEARTIES!
Sung by Jack Holmes) the Coachman, at a late masquerade in
St. Giles’s, in the character of Lord C—ST—R—GH.
I first was hir’d to peg a Hack *
They call u The Erin,*' sometime back,
Where soon I learn’d to patterflash t f
To curb the tits { and tip the lash—
Which pleas’d the Master of the Crown
So much, he had me up to town,
And gave me lots of quids § a year,
To tool fl “ The Constitution” here.
So, ya-hip, Hearties! here am I
That drive the Constitution Fly.
*	To drive a hackney coach. Hack, however, seems in this
place to mean an old broken down stage-coach,
f To talk slang, parliamentary or otherwise.
X Horses.
§ Money.
|| A process carried on successfully under the Roman Emperors,
Some wonder how the Fly holds out,
So rotten *tis, within, without $
So loaded, too, through thick and thin,
And with such heavy creturs In.
But, Lord, ’twill last our time—or if
The wheels should, now and then, get stiff,
Oil of Palm's * the thing that, flowing,
Sets the naves andfelloes f going!
So, ya-hip, Hearties! &c.
Some wonder, too, the tits that pull
This rum concern along, so full,
as appears from what Tacitus says of the '< Instiwnenta Regni”—
To tool is a technical phrase among the Knights of the Whip;
thus, that illustrious member of the Society, Richard Cypher, Esq.
says: “ I've dash'd at every thing—pegged at a jervy—tool’d a mail-
coach.”
•	Money.
t In Mr. Gregson's MS. these words are spelled “ knaves and
fellows," but I have printed them according to the proper wheel-
wright orthography.
Should never back, or bolt, or kick
The load and driver to Old Nick.
But, never fear—the breed, though British,
Is now no longer game or skittish;
Except, sometimes, about their corn,
Tamer Houyhnhnms * ne’er were born.
So, ya-hip, Hearties! &c.
And then so sociably we ride!—
While some have placesf snug, inside,
Some, hoping to be there anon,
Through many a dirty road hang on.
•	The extent of Mr. Gregson’s learning will, no doubt, astonish
tlie reader; and it appears by the following lines, from a Panegyric
written upon him, by One of the Fancy, that he is also a considera-
ble adept in the Latin language.
*< As to sciences—Bob knows a little of all,
“ And, in Latin, to shew that he’s no ignoramus,
“ He wrote once an Ode on his friend, Major Paul,
1	" And the motto was Paulo majora canamut
And when we reach a filthy spot,
(Plenty of which there are, God wot)
You’d laugh to see, with what an air
We take the spatter—each his share!
So, ya-hip, Hearties! &c.
The other song of Mr· Gregson, which I have
been lucky enough to lay hold of, was sung by Old
Prosy, the Jew, who went in the character of Major
C—rtw—ght, and who having been, at one time
of his life, apprentice to a mountebank doctor, was
able to enumerate, with much volubility, the virtues
of a certain infallible nostrum, which he called his
Annual Pill. The pronunciation of the Jew added
considerably to the effect.
THE ANNUAL FILL.
Sung by Old Prosy, the Jew, in the character of Major
C—RTW—GHT.
VILL nobodies try my nice Annual Pill,
Dat*s to purify every ting nashty avay ?
Pless ma heart, pless ma heart, let ma say vat I vill,
Not a Chrishtian or Shentleman minds vat I say!
fTis so pretty a bolus!—just down let it go,
And, at vonce, such a radical shange you vill see9
Dat Pd not be surprised, like de horse in de show,
If our heads all vere found, vere our tailsh ought
to be!
Vill nobodies try my nice Annual Pill9 &c.
’Twill cure all Electors, and purge away clear
Dat mighty bad itching dey’ve got in deir hands—
’Twill cure, too, all Statesmen, of dullness, ma tear,
Though the case vas as desperate as poor Mister
Van’s.
Dere is noting at all vat die Pill vill not reach—*
' Give the Sinecure Ghentleman von little grain,
Pless ma heart, it vill act, like de salt on de leech,
And he’ll throw de pounds, shillings, and pence,
up again!
Vill nobodies try my nice Annual PiU, &c.
*Twould be tedious, ma tear, all its peauties to paint—·
But, among oder tingsfundamentally wrong,
It vill cure de Proad Pottom *—a common complaint
Among M. Ps. and weavers—from sitting too
long, f
*	Meaning» I presume, Coalition Administrations,
t Whether sedentary habits have any thing to do with this
Should symptoms of speechmg preak out on a dunce,
(Vat is often de case) it vill stop de disease,
And pring avay all de long speeches at vonce, ‘
Dat else yould, like tape-warms, come by degrees!
Vill nobodies try my nice Annual PiU9
Dat’s to purify every ting nashty away)
Pless ma heart, pless ma heart, let ma say vat I Till
Not a Christian or Shentleman minds vat I say!
peculiar shape, I cannot determine, but that some have supposed
a sort of connection between them, appears from the following
remark, quoted in Konunann*s curious book, de Virginitatit Jure—
“ Ratio perquam lepida est apud Kirchner. in Legato, cum natura
lllas partes, quae ad sessionem sunt destinatae, latiores in feminis
fecerit quam in viris, innueus domi eas manere debere.1* Cap. 40.
The following poem is also from the Morning Chronicle, and has
every appearance of being by the same pen as the two others
I have quoted. The Examiner, indeed, in extracting it from
the Chronicle, says, “ we think we can guess whose easy
and sparkling hand it is.”
TO SIR HUDSON LOWE.
Effare causam nominis,
Utrum ne mores hoc tui
Nomen dedere, an nomen hoc
Secuta morum regula.
Ausonius.
SIR Hudson Lowe, Sir Hudson Low,
(By name, and ah! by nature so)
As thou art fond of persecutions,
Perhaps thou’st read, or heard repeated,
How Captain Gulliver was treated,
When thrown among the Lilliputians.
They tied him down—these little men did—
And haying valiantly ascended
Upon the Mighty Man*s protuberance.
They did so strut!—upon my soul,
It must have been extremely droll
To see their pigmy pride’s exuberance
And how the doughty mannikins
Amus’d themselves with sticking pins
And needles in the great man’s breeches j
And how some very little things,
That pass’d for Lords, on scaffoldings
Got up, and worried him with speeches.
Alas, alas! that it should happen
To mighty men to be caught napping!—
Though different, too, these persecutions f
For Gulliver, there, took the nap,
While, here, the Nap, oh sad mishap,
Is taken by the Lilliputians !
THE END.