TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
THE PRINCE OF WALES.
SIR,
IN allowing me to dedicate this Work
to your Royal Highness, you have conferred upon me
an honor, which I feel very sensibly; and I have only to
regret, that the pages which you have thus distinguished,
are not more deserving of such illustrious patronage.
Believe me, Sir,
with every sentiment of respect,
Your Royal Highness’s
very gratefid and devoted Servant,
THOMAS MOORE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT may be necessary to mention, that in arranging
the Odes, the Translator has adopted the order of the Vatican M S.
For those who wish to refer to the original, he has subjoined an In-
dex, which .marks the number of each Ode in Barnes and the other
editions.
AN ODE
(IN ALLUSION TO THE PftQNTISPrECE),
BY THOMAS MOORE.
Em ροάνοις r*wwnp
Τιίίος ΤΓ9Τ i μΛλιςτις
'Ιλαρός γιλων ecctro,
Mf$ucw rc kcu λυριζ&0
Αμψι αυτόν οι fiptatH
Αταλοι συνβχβροΜΌΜί’
νΟ βιλκ τα τ«ς Κυ£*ρ**
Εworn, ψυχρζ ·ιπκ*
"Ο ft λευχΛ iroffvfsun
KpWA <rUV poSoHTl·
Εφιλιι	ycperra.
Ή Ji θ*αων ανόητα,
ΣΟΦΙΗ ποτ ύζ OAufxx*
Εtropwr Ανακρίοντα,
Ετορωσα τ»ς έρωτας,
'Tirojuti^aroaf ιπτ«β
Σο^«—ί*	Ανακριοντα
Τον σοφωτατον α*·αντ«ν,
Καλ«σ·*ν όι <τοφι?Αΐ—
Τι, yipuvy rtov βιον jutv
Τοκ ipwn, tw Λυαι»,
K’ me i/tot xp&Ttiv ιίωχας ;
Τι φιλημ* της Κύθηρά,
Τι χυτπλλα τ» Λυαι*,
Am y ίτρυφκτχς αάων,
Ου* $[Αζς νομ,Ης ίιίοκΓχων,
Ονχ ifAov λαχων αωτορ ;
βΟ Λ Tmoi /AcXinii
Mure iv<r}(£pxwt, φηιτι,
βΟτΐ, <Γ8 y flMtfU [ΛΜ,
*0 σο^ωτατος· αττα*τ«ν
Παρα των σοφωμ xoXtytosr
Φιλιω, λνμζω,
Μιτα των καλών γυρχιχωρ*
Αψίλως ii τψττρΛ παίζω,
Ως λυριι yap, tpop tirof
Αραπνιι μ,ορχς έρωτας*
*Λ& |3*οΤ£ γαλήνη*.
Φιλιών μαλις-Λ πάντων,
Ου rofof μιλωίος ίψι;
Τκ ατοφαηρος μ>$ρ *ρ ;
REMARKS ON ANACREON.
There is very little known with certainty of the life of Ana-
creon. Chamaeleon Heracleotes,* who wrote upon the subject, has
been lost in the general wreck of ancient literature. The editors
of our poet have collected the' few trifling anecdotes, which arc
scattered through the extant authors of antiquity, and supplying the
deficiency of materials by fictions of their own imagination, they
have arranged, whaf they call, a life of Anacreon. These specious
fabrications are intended to indulge that interest, which we naturally
feel in the biography of illustrious men; but it is rather a dangerous
kind of illusion, as it confounds the limits of history and romance,f
and is too often supported by unfaithful citation. J
*	He is quoted by Athenpeus tt ru mpt ru Avxxptoyros.
f The History of Anacreon, by Monsieur Ga9on (le poete sansfard), is professedly a ro- '
mance; nor does Mademoiselle Scuderi, from whom he borrowed the idea9 pretend to his*
torical veracity in her account of Anacreon and Sappho. These, then» are allowable. But
how can Barnes be forgiven, who, with all the confidence of a biographer, traces every wan-
dering of the poet, and settles him in his old age at a country-villa near Teos.
} The learned Monsieur Bayle has detected some infidelities of quotation in Le Fevre. See
Dictionnaire Historique, &c. Madame Dacier is not more accurate than her father: they
have almost made Anacrcon prime minister to the monarch of Samos.
Our poet was bom in the city of Teos, in the delicious region of
Ionia, where every thing respired voluptuousness.* The time of
his birth appears to have been in the sixth century before Christ,
and he flourished at that remarkable period, when, under the po-
lished tyrants Hipparchus and Polycrates, Athens and Samos were
the rival asylums of genius. The name of his father is doubtful,
and therefore cannot be very interesting. His family was perhaps
illustrious, but those who discover in Plato that he was a descendant
of the monarch Codrus, exhibit, as usual, more zeal than accu-
racy. J
The disposition and talents of Anacreon recommended him to
the monarch of Samos, and he was formed to be the friend of such
a prince as Polycrates. Susceptible only to the pleasures, he felt
not the corruptions of the court, and while Pythagoras fled from
the tyrant, Anacreon was celebrating his praises on the lyre. We
*	The Asiatics were as remarkable for genius as for luxury. “ Ingenia Asiatica inclyta
per gentes fecere Poetae, Anacreon, inde Mimnermus et Antimachus, &c.” Solinus.
t I have not attempted to define the particular Olympiad, but have adopted the idea of
Bayle, who says, “ Je n’ai point marque d’Olympiade; car pour un homme qui a vecu
85 ans, il me semble que Ton ne doit point s’enfermer dans des bomes si etroites.”
X This mistake is founded on a false interpretation of a very obvious passage in Plato’s
Dialogue on Temperance; it originated frith Madame Dacier, and has been received im-
plicitly by many. Gail, a late editor of Anacreon, seems to claim to himself the merit of
dctccting this error, but Bayle had obfcrved it before him.
arc told too by Maximus Tyrius, that by the influence of his amatory
songs, he softened the mind of Polycrates into a spirit of benevolence
towards his subjects.*
The amours of the poet and the rivalship of the tyrant f I shall
pass over in silence; and there are few, I presume, who will regret
the omission of most of those anecdotes, which the industry of some
editors has not only promulged, but discussed. Whatever is repug-
nant to modesty and virtue is considered in ethical science, by a sup-
position very favourable to humanity, as impossible; and this amia-
ble persuasion should be much more Strongly entertained, where the
transgression wars with nature as well as virtue. But why are we
not allowed to indulge in the presumption ? Why are we offici-
ously reminded that there have been such instances of depravity ?
Hipparchus, who now maintained at Athens the power which
his father Pisistratus had usurped, was one of those elegant princes
who have polished the fetters of their subjects. He was the first,
*	AfMifiw Σαμαοίί Πολυκράτη* 'nfupt&t. Maxim· Tyr. § 21. Maximus Tyrius mentions this
among other instances of the influence of poetry. If Gail had read Maximus Tyrius, how
could he ridicule this idea in Moutonnet, as un authenticated ?
ΐ In the romance of Clelia, the anecdote which I allude to is told of a young girl, with
whom Anacreon fell in love while she personated the god Apollo in a masque. But here
Mademoiselle Scuderi consulted nature more than truth.
B 2
according to Plato, who edited the poems of Homer, and com-
the Panathenaea. As his court was the galaxy of genius, Anacreon
should not be absent. Hipparchus sent a barge for him; the poet
embraced the invitation, and the muses and the loves were wafted
with him to Athens.
The manner of Anacreon’s death was singular. We are told that
in the 85 th year of his age he was choaked by a grape-stone ;♦ and
however we may smile at their enthusiastic partiality, who pre-
tend that it was a peculiar indulgence of Heaven which stole him
from the world by this easy and characteristic death, we cannot
help admiring that his fate should be so emblematic of his disposi-
tion. Caelius Calcagninus alludes to this catastrophe in the follow-
ing epitaph on our poet:—
*	Fabricius appears not to trust very implicitly in this story. “ Uv« passe acino tandem
suffocatus, si credimus Suidse in wwvoms; alii enim hoc mortis genere periisse tradunt So-
phoclem·’* Fabricii Bibliothec. Gracc. Lib. ii. cap. 15. It must be confessed that Lucian,
who tells us that Sophocles was choaked by a grape-stone, in the very same treatise mentions
the longevity of Anacreon, and yet is silent on the manner of his death. Could he have been
ignorant of such a remarkable coincidence, or knowing, could he have neglected to remark
it ? See Regnier’s introduction to his Anacreon.
manded them to be sung by the rhapsodists at the celebration of
* Then, hallow’d Sage, those lips which pour’d along
The sweetest lapses of the cygnet’s song,
A grape has clos’d for ever!
Here let the ivy kiss the poet’s tomb,
Here let the rose he lov’d with laurels bloom,
In bands that ne’er shall sever!
But far be thou—oh! far, unholy vine,
By whom the favourite minstrel of the Nine,
Expir’d his rosy breath ;
Thy god himself now blushes to confess,
Unholy vine! he feels he loves thee less, >
Since poor Anacreon’s death 1
There can scarcely be imagined a more delightful	theme for	the
warmest speculations of fancy to wanton upon, than	the	idea	of an
intercourse between Anacreon and Sappho. 1 could wish to believe
*	At te, sancte senex, acinus sub tartara misit;
Cygneae clausit qui tibi vocis iter·
Vos, hedera, tumulum, tumulum vos cingite lauri
Hoc rosa perpetuo vernet odora loco;
At vitis procul hinc, procul hinc odiosa facessat,
Qu« causam dirse protulit, uva, necis,
Creditur ipse minus vitem jam Bacchus amare,
In vatem tantum quae fuit ausa nefas.
Caelius Calcagninus has translated or imitated the epigrams as τη» Μνρννκβνν which are given
under the name of Anacreon.
that they were cotemporary: any thought of an interchange be-
tween hearts so congenial in warmth of passion and delicacy of ge-
nius, gives such play to the imagination, that the mind loves to in-
dulge in it; but the vision dissolves before historical truth; and Cha-
maeleon and Hermesianax, who are the source of the supposition,
are considered as having merely indulged in a poetical anachronism.*
To infer the moral dispositions of a poet from the tone of senti-
ment which pervades his works, is sometimes a very fallacious ana-
logy : but the soul of Anacreon speaks so unequivocally through his
odes, that we may consult them as the faithful mirrors of his heart, f
*	Barnes is convinced cf the synchronism of Anacreon and Sappho; bat very gratui-
tously· In citing his authorities, it is strange that he neglected the line which Fulvius Ur·
sinus has quoted» as of Anacreon, among the testimonies to Sappho·
t An Italian poet, in some verses on Belleau’s translation of Anacreon, pretends to ima~
gine that our bard did not feel as he wrote·
Eifu λαβών ur&p»s Σαψφω wapdtvov aSvfwof,
Fabricius thinks that they might have been cotemporary, but considers their amour as a tale
of imagination· Vossius rejects the idea entirely: so does Olaus Borrichius, &c. &c.
Lyaeum, Venerem, Cupidinemque
Senex lusit Anacreon poeta·
Sed quo tempore nec capaciores
Rogabat cyathos, nec inquietis
Urebatur amoribus, sed ipsis
Tantum versibus et jocis amabat,
Nullum pr* se habitum gerens amantis·
We find him there the elegant voluptuary, diffusing the seductive
charm of sentiment over passions and propensities at which rigid
morality must frown. His heart, devoted to indolence, seems to
think that there is wealth enough in happiness, but seldom happi-
ness enough in wealth; and the chearfulness with which he bright-
ens his old age is interesting and endearing: like his own rose, he is
fragrant even in decay. But the most peculiar feature of his mind
is that love of simplicity, which he attributes to himself so very feel-
ingly, and which breathes characteristically through all that he has
sung. In truth, if we omit those vices in our estimate which ethnic
religion not only connived at, but consecrated, we shall say that
the disposition of our poet was amiable; his morality was relaxed,
but not abandoned; and virtue, with her zone loosened, may be an
emblem of the character of Anacreon.*
To Love and Bacchus ever young»
While sage Anacreon touch’d the lyre,
He neither felt the loves he sung,
Nor fill’d his bowl to Bacchus higher.
Those flowery days had faded long,
When youth could act the lover’s part;
And passion trembled in his song,
But never, never, reach’d his heart·
*	Anacreon’s character has been variously coloured· Barnes lingers on it with enthusiastic
admiration, but he is always extravagant, if not sometimes even prophane· Monsieur Bail-
let, who is in the opposite extreme, exaggerates too much the testimonies which he has con*
Of his person and physiognomy time has preserved such uncertain
memorials, that perhaps it were better to leave the pencil to fancy;
and few can read the Odes of Anacreon without* imagining the form
of the animated old bard, crowned with roses, and singing to the
lyre; but the head prefixed to this work* has been considered so
authentic, that we scarcely could be justified in the omission of it;
and some have thought that it is by no means deficient in that be-
nevolent suavity of expression, which should characterize the coun-
tenance of such a poet.
suited ; and we cannot surely agree with him when he cites such a compiler as Athenaeus,
as “ un des plus savans critiques de l*antiquit£.” Jugement des S$avans, M.CV.
Barnes could not have read the passage he refers to, when he accuses Le Fevre of having
censured our poet’s character in a note on Longinus; the note in question is manifest irony^
in allusion to some reprehension which Le Fevre had suffered for his Anacreon, and it is evi-
dent that praise rather than censure is intimated. See Johannes Vulpius de utilitate Poetices,
who vindicates our poet’s reputation.
*	It is taken from the Bibliotheca of Fulvius Ursinus. Bellorius has copied the same
head into his imagines. Johannes Faber, in his description of the coin of Ursinus, men-
tions another head on a very beautiful cornelian, which he supposes was worn in a ring by
some admirer of the poet. In the Iconografia of Canini there is a youthful head of Ana-
creon from a Grecian medal, with the letters ΤΕΙΟΣ around it; on the reverse there is a Nep-
tune, holding a spear in his right hand, and a dolphin in the left, with the word ΤΙΑΝΩΝ,
inscribed, “ Volendoci denotare (says Canini) che quelli cittadini la coniailero in honore
del suo cOmpatriota poeta.” There is also among the coins of De Wilde one, which,
though it bears no effigy, was probably struck to the memory of Anacreon. It has the
word ΤΗΙΩΝ, incircled with an ivy crown. €€ At quidni respicit h*c corona Anacreontem»
nobilem lyricum ?** De Wilde*
After the very enthusiastic eulogiums, bestowed by the ancients
and modems upon the poems of Anacreon,* we need not be diffi-
dent in expressing our raptures at their beauty, nor hesitate to pro-
nounce them the most polished remains of antiquity .f They are all
beauty, all enchantment. J He steals us so insensibly along with him,
that we sympathize even in his excesses. In his amatory odes there
*	Besides those which are extant, he wrote hymns, elegies, epigrams, &c. Some of the
epigrams still exist. Horace alludes to a poem of his upon the rivalry of Circe and Penelope
in the affections of Ulysses, lib. i. od. 17· The scholiast upon Nicander cites a fragment
from a poem upon sleep by Anacreon, and attributes to him likewise a medicinal treatise·
Fulgentius mentions a work of his upon the war between Jupiter and the Titans* and the
origin of the consecration of the eagle.
f See Horace, Maximus Tyrius, &c.	€€ His style (says Scaliger) is sweeter than the
juice of the Indian reed.” Poetices, lib. i. cap. 44.	“ From the softness of his verses (says
Olaus Borrichius) the ancients bestowed on him the epithets sweet, delicate, graceful, &c/f
Dissertationes Academic», de poetis. Dies. 2. Scaliger again praises him in a pun ; speak-
ing of the /xiAw or ode, “ Anacreon autem non solum dedit haec {«λ* sed etiam in ipsi*
mella/ * See the passage of Rapin, quoted by all the editors. I cannot omit citing the fol-
lowing very spirited apostrophe of the author of the commentary, prefixed to the Parma
edition, <€ O vos sublimes animae, voseApollinis alumni, qui post unum Alcmancm in toti
Hellade lyricam poesini exsuscitastis, coluistis, amplificastis, quaeso vos an ullus unquam
fuerit vates qui Teio cantori vel naturae candore vel metri suavitate palmam praeripuerit/’
X €t We may perceive/’ says Vossius, “ that the iteration of his words conduces very
much to the sweetness of his style/ * Henry Stephen remarks the same beauty in a note
on the 44th ode. This figure of iteration is his most appropriate grace. The modern
writers of Juvenilia and Basia, have adopted it to an excess which destroys the effect.
ό
is a delicacy of compliment not to be found in any other ancient
poet. Love at that period was rather an unrefined emotion, and the
intercourse of the sexes was animated more by passion than senti-
ment. They knew not thofe little tendernesses which form the spi-
ritual part of affection; their expression of feeling was therefore rude
and unvaried, and the poetry of love deprived of its most captivating
graces. Anacreon, however, attained some ideas of this gallantry;
and the same delicacy of mind which led him to this refinement,
prevented him from yielding to the freedom of language, which has
sullied the pages of all the other poets. His descriptions are warm,
but the warmth is in the ideas, not the words. He is sportive with-
out being wanton, and ardent without being licentious. His poetic
invention is most brilliantly displayed in those allegorical fictions,
which so many have endeavoured to imitate, because all have con-
fessed them to be inimitable. Simplicity is the distinguishing feature
of these odes, and they interest by their innocence, while they fas-
cinate by their beauty; they are, indeed, the infants of the Muses,
and may be said to lisp in numbers.
I shall not be accused of enthusiastic partiality, by those who have
read and felt the original; but to others I am conscious that this
should not be the language of a translator, whose faint reflection of
these beauties can but little justify his admiration of them.
in the age of Anacreon music and poetry were inseparable. These
kindred talents were for a long time associated, and the poet always
sung his own compositions to the lyre. It is probable that they were
not set to any regular air, but rather a kind of musical recitation,
which was varied according to the fancy and feelings of the mo-
ment.* The poems of Anacreon were sung at banquets as late as the
time of Aulus Gellius, who tells us that he heard one of the odes
performed at a birth-day entertainment.^
The singular beauty of our poet’s stile, and perhaps the careless
facility with which he appears to have trifled, have induced, as I re-
marked, a number of imitations—some have succeeded with won-
derful felicity, as may be discerned in the few odes, which are attri-
buted to writers of a later period. But none of his emulators have
been so dangerous to his fame, as those Greek ecclesiastics of the
early ages, who, conscious of inferiority to their prototypes, deter-
*	In the Paris edition there are four of the original odes set to music, by citizens Le Sueur,
Gossec, Mehul and Cherubini—“ On chante do Latin et de Pltalien,” says Gail, “ quel-
quefoi» meme sans Ice entendre; qui empfcche que nous ne chantions des ode* Grecques ?”
The chromatic learning of these composer» is very unlike what we are told of the simple
melody of the ancients.
f The Parma commentator is rather careless in referring to this passage of Aulus Gellius,
(Lib. xix. cap. 9.) The ode was not sung by the rhetorician Julianus, as he says, but by
the minstrels of both sexes, who were introduced at the entertainment.
mined on removing the possibility of comparison, and under a sem-
blance of moral zeal, destroyed the most exquisite treasures of anti-
quity.* Sappho and Alcaeus were among the victims of this viola-
tion, and the sweetest flowers of Grecian literature fell beneath the
rude hand of ecclesiastical presumption. It is true they pretended
that this sacrifice of genius was canonized by the interests of reli-
gion ; but I have already afligned the most probable motive,'}' and
if Gregorius Nazianzenus had not written Anacreontics, we might
now perhaps have the works of the Teian unmutilated, and be em-
powered to say exultingly with Horace—
Nec si quid olim lusit Anacreon
Delevit ffitas.
The zeal by which these bishops professed to be actuated, gave birth
more innocently, indeed, to an absurd species of parody, as repug-
nant to piety as it is to taste, where the poet of voluptuousness was
*	See what Colomesius, in his u Literary Treasures,” has quoted from Alcyonius de
exilio; it may be found in Baxter. Colomesius, after citing the passage» adds, “ Haec
auro contra cara non potui non apponere·99
f We may perceive by the beginning of the first hymn of Bishop Synesius, that he made
Anacreon and Sappho his models of composition·
Ayi |aoi Xiytia
Mira Τ%Ϊλ9 αοΛαη,
Mira XteCtap r%
Margunius and Damascenus were likewise authors of pious Anacreontics»
made a preacher of the gospel, and his muse, like the Venus in
armour at Lacedaemon, was arrayed in all the severities of priestly
instruction. Such was the “ Anacreon Recantatus,” by Carolus de
Aquino, a Jesuit, published 17 01, which consisted of a series of
palinodes to the several songs of our poet. Such too was the Chrif-
tian Anacreon of Patrignanus, another Jesuit,* who preposterously
transferred to a most sacred subject all that Anacreon had sung to
festivity.
His metre has been very frequently adopted by the modem Latin
poets. Scaliger, Taubmannus, and others, have evinced, that it is by
no means uncongenial with that language.*}' The Anacreontics of
+ This perhaps is the “ Jcsuita quidam Greculus” alluded to by Barnes, who has him-
self composed an Afanftm Xftrtaxx, as absurd as the rest, but somewhat more skilfully exe-
cuted·
t Thus too Albertus, a Danish poet—
Fidii tui minister
Gaudebo semper esse
Gaudebo semper illi
litare thure mulso;
Gaudebo semper illum
Laudare pumiliUis
Anacreonticillis. See the Danish Poets collected by Rostgaard*.
These pretty littlenesses defy translation·
Scaliger, however, scarcely deserve the name; they are glittering
with conceits, and though often elegant, are always laboured. The
beautiful fictions of Angerianus,* have preserved more happily than
any, the delicate turn of those allegorical fables, which, frequently
passing through the mediums of version and imitation, have gene*·
rally lost their finest rays in the transmission. Many of the Italian
poets have sported on the subjects of Anacreon. Among the Ger-
mans, I believe that Hagedom has made him his model, and if we
may judge by the references of Degen, the German language is rich
in Anacreontic imitation. Among the French, La Farre, Chaulieu,
and others, have professed to cultivate the Muse of Teos, and they
have attained all her negligence with little of the grace that em-
bellishes it.
We come now to a retrospect of the editions of Anacreon. To
Henry Stephen we are indebted for having first recovered his remains
from the obscurity in which they had reposed for so many ages. He
found the 7th ode, as we are told, on the cover of an old book, and
communicated it to Victorius, who mentions the circumstance in
his “ various readings.” Stephen was then very young, and this
discovery was considered by some critics of that day as a literary im-
*	From Angerianus Prior has taken his most elegant mythological subjects.
position.* In 1554, however, he gave Anacreon to the world,f
accompanied with annotations and a Latin version of the greater
part of the odes. The learned still hesitated to receive them as the
relics of the Teian bard, and suspected them to be the fabrication of
some monks of the lOth century. This was an idea from which the
classic muse recoiled; and the Vatican manuscript, consulted by
Scaliger and Salmasius, confirmed the antiquity of most of the
poems. A very inaccurate copy of this MS. was taken by Isaac
Vossius, and this is the authority which Barnes has followed in his
collation; accordingly he misrepresents almost as often as he quotes,
and the subsequent editors, relying upon him, have spoken of the
manuscript with not less confidence than ignorance. The literary
world has at length been gratified with this curious memorial of the
*	Robertellus, in his work “ De ratione corrigendi,” pronounces these verses to be the
triflings of some insipid Grsecist.
f Ronsard commemorates this event:—
Je ray boire k Henri Etienne
Qui des enfers non· a rendu 9
Du vieil Anacreon perdu9
La douce lyre Te'ienne.	Ode	xv· Book 5.
1 fill the bowl to Stephen’s name.
Who rescued from the gloom of night
The Teian bard of festive fame,
And brought his living lyre to light·
poet, by the industry of the Abbe Spaletti, who, in 1781, published
at Rome a fac-simile of the pages of the Vatican manuscript, which
contained the odes of Anacreon.*
Monsieur Gail has given a catalogue of all the editions and trans-
lations of Anacreon. I find their number to be much greater than
I could possibly have had an opportunity of consulting. I lhall
therefore content myself with enumerating those editions only which
I have been able to collect; they are very few, but I believe they
are the most important.
The edition by Henry Stephen, 1554, at Paris—the Latin version
is by Colomesius attributed to John Dorat.f
The old French translations, by Ronsard and Belleau—the former
published in 1555, the latter in 1556. It appears that Henry
Stephen communicated his manuscript of Anacreon to Ronsard,
*	This manuscript, which Spaletti thinks as old as the 10th century, was brought from
the Palatine into the Vatican library—it is a kind of anthology of Greek epigrams, and in
the 676th page of it are found the rqvxyJSi» σνμ*%οσια*αχ of Anacreon·
f “ Le mcme (M. Vossius) m’a dit qu*il avoit possedi un Anacreon, ou Scaliger avoit
marqui de sa main, qu’ Henri Etienne n’etoit pas l’auteur de la version Latine des odes de ce
poete, mais Jean Dorat.M Paulus Colomesius, Particularity.
Colomesius, however, seems to have relied too implicitly on Vossius—-almost all these
particularites begin with “ M. Vossius m*a dit.”
before he published it, by a note of Muretus upon one of the son-
nets of that poet.*
The edition	by	Le Fevre, 1660.
------- .....	Madame Dacier,	J081, with a	prose translation.f
---------------------Longepierre, 1084, with a translation in verse.
..............- Baxter, London, 1695.
A French translation by La Fosse, 1704.
“ L’Histoire des Odes d’Anacreon,” by Monsieur Ga^on; Rotter-
dam, 1712.
A translation in English verse, by several hands, 1713, in which
the odes by Cowley are inserted.
The edition	by	Barnes; London,	1721.
----------- ■	Dr. Trapp, 1733,	with a	Latin	verfion	in	elegiac
metre.
A translation in English verse, by John Addison, 1735.
A collection of Italian translations of Anacreon, published at Ve-
nice, 1736, consisting of those by Corsini, Regnier,J Sal vini, Mar-
chetti, and one by several anonymous authors.
*	“ La fiction dc cc sonnet comme Γ auteur memc m’a dit, est prinsc d’une ode d’Ana-
creon, encore non imprimee, qu’il a depuis traduit σν μ»ψ ψιλν χιλι?**.”
f The author of Nouvelles de la Repub. des Lett, praises this translation very liberally.
I have always thought it vague and spiritless.
X The notes of Regnier are not inserted in this edition; they must be interesting, as they
were for the most part communicated by the ingenious Menage, who, we may perceive,
A translation in English verse, by Fawkes and Doctor Broome,
1760.*
Another, anonymous, 1768.
The edition by Spaletti, at Rome, 178I; with the fac-simile of
the Vatican M. S.
The edition by Degen, 1780, who published also a German trans-
lation of Anacreon, esteemed the best.
A translation in English verse, by Urquhart, 1787·
The edition by Citoyen Grail, at Paris, 7th year, 1799, with a
prose translation.
bestowed some research on the subject by a passage in the Menagiana—C’est aussi lui
(M. Bigot) qui s’est donni la peine de conferer des manuscrits en Italie dans le tems que
je travaillois sur Anacreon.” Menagiana, seconde partie.
*	This is the most complete of the English translations.
ODES
OF
ANACREON.
til
ODE I.
I SAW the smiling bard of pleasure,
The minstrel of the Teian measure;
’Twas in a vision of the night,
He beam’d upon my wondering sight;
I heard his voice, and warmly prest
The dear enthusiast to my breast.
v
This ode is the first of the series in the Vatican manuscript, which does
not attribute it to any other poet than Anacreon. They who assert that
the manuscript imputes it to Basilius, have been misled by the wqrds
His tresses wore a silv’ry die,
But beauty sparkled in his eye ;
Sparkled in his eyes of fire,
Through the mist of soft desire.
His lip exhal’d, whene’er he sigh’d,
The fragrance of the racy tide;
Ta (turn βαα-ιλιχως in the margin, which are merely intended as a title to
the following ode. Whether it be the production of Anacreon or not, it
has all the features of ancient simplicity, and is a beautiful imitation of the
poet’s happiest manner.
Sparkled in his eyes offire,
Through the mist of soft desire.] ** How could he know at the first look
(says Baxter) that the poet was	?”	there are surely many tell-tales
of this propensity; and the following are the indices, which the physiog-
nomist gives, describing a disposition perhaps not unlike that of Anacreon
—Οφθαλμοί χλυζο[ΑΜΐ} κυρatttmti » «ντοκ, *»f afpefuria xeu tuvctOaa» ίπτοηντοη.
ere it aJixoi, art xuxxpyot, art φυπως φαύλη;, uri u/Mtcoi—“AdamantiUS. “ The
eyes that are humid and fluctuating show a propensity to pleasure and
love ; they bespeak too a mind of integrity and beneficence, a generosity
of disposition, and a genius for poetry.”
Baptista Porta tells us some strange opinions of the ancient physiogno-
mists on this subject, their reasons for which were curious, and perhaps
not altogether fanciful. Vide Physiognom. Johan. Baptist. Portae.
And, as with weak and reeling feet,
He came my cordial kiss to meet,
An infant, of the Cyprian band,
Guided him on with tender hand—
Quick from his glowing brows he drew
His braid, of many a wanton hue;
I took the braid of wanton twine—
It breath’d of him and blush’d with wine !
I took the braid of wanton twine—
It breath'd of him,	Philoetratus has the same thought in one of
his tpurixa, where he speaks of the garland which he had ient to his mistress.
Ε» Si βχλιι t* βιλω χαριζίσίαι, ru λ<«ψαΐτα «rrnrf/Αψον, μιιχίτι mtovrx ροίων juoyoy
Λλλα xat η. “ If thou art inclined to gratify thy lover, send me back the
remains of the garland, no longer breathing of roses only, but of thee!”
Which pretty conceit is borrowed (as the author of the Observer remarks)
in a well-known little song of Ben Johnson’s:—
“ But thou thereon didst only breathe,
“ And sent it back to me ;
“ Since when it looks and smells I swear,
“ Not of itself, but thee !”
I twin’d it round my thoughtless brow,
And ah 1 I feel it’s magic now 1
I feel that ev’n his garland’s touch
Can make the bosom love too much !
And ah ! I feel it's magic now /] This idea, as Longepierre remarks, is
in an epigram of the fcventh book of the Anthologia.
E£ot£ juoi irivom <rvi/ifixis<rx XxpixXu
Λχθρη rxf tJixf χ/Α,φεζχλί rtf*
ITuf ολοον ictvTU f*t.
While I unconscious quafTd my wine,
’Twas then thy fingers slyly stole
Upon my brow that wreath of thine,
Which since has madden'd all my soul!
ODE II.
GlVE me the harp of epic song,
Which Homer’s finger thrill’d along;
But tear away the sanguine string,
For war is not the theme I sing.
Proclaim the laws of festal rite—
I’m monarch of the board to night;
And all around ihall brim as high,
And quaff the tide as deep as 11
And when the cluster’s mellowing dews
Their warm, enchanting balm infuse,
Our feet shall catch th’ elastic bound,
And reel us through the dance’s round.
Proclaim the laws of festal rite—] The ancients prescribed certain laws
of drinking at their festivals, for an account of which see the commenta-
tors. Anacreon here acts the symposiarch, or master of the festival. I have
translated according to those, who consider χντιλλ» 0w/*w as an inversion
of iurfMtf χνίτίλλ»».
Then, Bacchus I we shall sing to thee,
In wild but sweet ebriety !
And flash around such sparks of thought,
As Bacchus could alone have taught I
Then give the harp of epic song,
Which Homer’s finger thrill’d along—
But tear away the sanguine string,
For war is not the theme I sing!
ODE III.
LISTEN to the Muse’s lyre,
Master of the pencil’s fire 1
Sketch’d in painting’s bold display,
Many a city first portray;
Many a city, revelling free,
Warm with loose festivity.
Picture then a rosy train,
Bacchants straying o’er the plain;
Piping, as they roam along,
Roundelay or shepherd-song.
Paint me next (if painting may
Such a theme as this portray)
All the happy heaven of love,
Which these blessed mortals prove.
Monsieur la Fosse has thought proper to lengthen this poem by con-
siderable interpolations of his own, which he thinks are indispensably ne-
cessary to the completion of the description.
ODE IV.
Vulcan t hear your glorious task,
I do not from your labours ask
In gorgeous panoply to shine—
For war was ne’er a sport of mine.
No—let me have a silver bowl,
Where I may cradle all my soul;
But let not o’er it’s simple frame
Your mimic constellations flame;
Nor grave upon the swelling side
Orion, scowling o’er the tide.
I care not for the glitt’ring wane,
Nor yet the weeping sister train.
But oh 1 let vines luxuriant roll
Their blushing tendrils round the bowl.
This is the ode which Aulus Gellius tells us was performed by minstrels
at an entertainment where he was present.	*
While many a rose-lip’d bacchant maid
Is culling clusters in their shade.
Let sylvan gods, in antic shapes,
Wildly press the gushing grapes ;
And flights of loves, in wanton ringlets,
Flit around on golden winglets;
While Venus, to her mystic bower,
Beckons the rosy vintage-power.
While many a rose-lip'd bacchant maid,	I	have given this accord-
ing to the Vatican manuscript, in which the ode concludes with the fol-
lowing lines, not inserted accurately in any of the editions.
Tlotwrov αμ,ιηλΗς juwi
Κα* βοτρυ&ς κατ αυτών,
Και fAawafw τρνγωιτας,
Ποκ* Λ λιρο*
AwoCata; π&τχντΑβ,
Τ*ς (ΓΑτυρας γίλωντας^
Και χρυ<τ*ς τνς ίρωτας,
Και KvStpw γιλαχτα*,
*0fMt καλω Αυαιω,
Ερωτα κ Άφροίιτην*
ODE V.
GRAVE me a cup with brilliant grace,
Deep as the rich and holy vase,
Which on the shrine of Spring reposes,
When shepherds hail that hour of roses.
Grave it with themes of chaste design,
Fit for a heavenly bowl like mine.
Display not there the barbarous rites,
In which religious zeal delights;
Nor any tale of tragic fate,
Which hist’ry trembles to relate!
No—cull thy fancies from above,
Themes of heav’n and themes of love.
Degen thinks that this ode is a more modern imitation of the preceding.
There is a poem by Caelius Calcagninus, in the manner of both, where
he gives instructions about the making of a ring.
Tornabis annulum mihi
Et fabre, et apte, et commode, &c. &c.
Let Bacchus, Jove’s ambrosial boy,
Distill the grape in drops of joy,
And while he smiles at every tear,
Let warm-ey’d Venus, dancing near,
With spirits of the genial bed,
The dewy herbage deftly tread.
Let Love be there without his arms,
In timid nakednefs of charms;
Let have be there, without his arm, &<;.] Thus Sannazaro in the eclogue
of Gallicio nell’ Arcadia—
Vegoan 11 vaghi Amori
Senza fiammeUe, o etraJi,
Scherzando insieme pargoletti e midi.
Fluttering on the basy wing,
A train of naked Cupids came,
Sporting round in harmless ring,
Without a dart—without a flame.
And thus in the Pervigilium Veneris—
Ite nymphae—posuit arma, feriatus est amor—
Love is disarm'd—ye nymphs, in safety stray,
Your bosoms now may have a holiday !
And all the Graces, link’d with Love,
Blushing thro* the shadowy grove;
While rosy boys disporting round,
In circlets trip the velvet ground—-
But ah ! if there Apollo toys,
I tremble for my rosy boys 1
But ah ! if there Apollo toys,
I tremble for my rosy boys f] An allusion to the fable, that Apollo had
killed his beloved boy Hyacinth, while playing with him at quoits. “ This
(says M. La Fofie) is assuredly the sense of the text, and it cannot admit
of any other.”
The Italian tranilators, to save themselves the trouble of a note, have
taken the liberty of making Anacreon explain this fable. Thus Salvini,
the most literal of any of them—
Ma con lor non giuochi Apollo ;
Che in fiero risco
Col duro disco
A Giacinto fiacco il colla.
ODE VI.
As late I sought the spangled bowers,
To cull a wreath of matin flowers,
Where many an early rose was weeping,
I found the urchin Cupid sleeping.
The Vatican M S. pronounces this beautiful fiction to be the genuine
ofispring of Anacreon. It has all the features of the parent—
—et facile insciis
Noscitetur ab omnibus.
The commentators however have attributed it to Julian, a royal poet.
Where many an early rose was weepings
I found the urchin Cupid sleeping.] This idea is prettily imitated in the
following epigram by Andreas Naugerius ;—
Florentes dum vagans mea Hyella per hortos
Texit odoratis lilia cana rosis,
Ecce rosas inter latitantem invenit amorem
Et simul annexis floribus implicuit.
Luctatur primo—et contra nitentibus alis
Indomitus tentat solvere vincta puer,
Mox ubi lacteolas et dignas matre papillas
Vidit et ora ipsos nata movere Deos.
I caught the boy—a goblet’s tide
Was richly mantling by my side—
Impositosque comae ambrosios ut sentit odores
Quosque legit diti messe beatus Arabs ;
“ I (dixit) mea, quaere novum tibi mater amorem,
“ Imperio sedes haec erit apta meo.”
As fair Hyella, through the bloomy grove,
A wreath of many mingled flowrets wove,
Within a rose a sleeping love she found,
And in the twisted wreathe the baby bound—·
Awhile he struggled, and impatient tried
To break the rosy bonds the virgin tied;
But when he saw her bosom’s milky swell,
Her features, where the eye of Jove might dwell j
And caught th’ ambrosial odours of her hair,
Rich as the breathings of Arabian air;
“ Oh ! mother Venus” (said the raptur’d child
By charms, of more than mortal bloom, beguil’d)
“ Go—seek another boy—thou’st lost thine own—
“ Hyella’s bosom shall be Cupid’s throne !”
This epigram of Naugerius is imitated by Lodovico Dolce, in a poem,
beginning
Mentre raccoglie hor uno, hor altro fiore
Vicina a un rio di chiare et lucid* onde,
Lidia, &c. &c.
I caught him by his downy wing,
And whelm’d him in the racy spring.
Oh ! then I drank the poison’d bowl,
And Love now nestles in my soul 1
Yes—yes—my soul is Cupid’s nest,
I feel him fluttering in my breaft.—
ODE m
THE women tell me every day
That all my bloom has past away.
“ Behold,” the pretty wantons cry—
“ Behold this mirror with a sigh;
“ The locks upon thy brow are few,
** And like the rest, they’re withering too I”
Whether decline has thinn’d my hair,
I’m sure I neither know nor care—
Alberti has imitated this ode in a poem beginning—
Nisa mi dice e Clori
Tirsi, tu se’ pur veglio.
Whether decline has thmn'd my hair,
I'm sure J neither know nor care.] Henry Stephen veiy justly remarks
the elegant negligence of expression in the original here—
Eyu it tας χο/Λας
Ειτ’ ttffw, «τ’ αχ*λβα»
Ονχ’ οι fa.
But this I know, and this I feel,
As onward to the tomb I steal,
That still as death approaches nearer,
The joys of life are sweeter, dearer;
And had I but an hour to live,
That little hour to bliss I’d give!
And Longepierre has adduced from Catullus, what he thinks a similar
inilance of this simplicity of manner—
Ipse quis sit, utrura sit, an non sit, id quoque nescit.
Longepierre was a good critic; but perhaps the line which he has se-
lected is a specimen of a carelessness not very elegant—at the same time I
confess, that none of the Latin poets has ever appeared to me so capable
of imitating the graces of Anacreon, as Catullus, if he had not allowed a
depraved imagination to hurry him so often into vulgar licentiousness.
That still as death approaches nearer,
The joys of life are sweeter, dearer.]	Pontanus has a very delicate
thought upon the subject of old age—-
Quid rides, Matrona ? senem quid temnis amantem ?
Quisquis amat, nulli est conditione, senex.
Why do you scorn my want of youth,
And with a smile my brow behold ?
Lady dear!—believe this truth,
That he who loves cannot be old.
ODE VIIL
I CARE not for the idle state
Of Persia’s king, the rich, the great I
I envy not the monarch's throne,
Nor wish the treasur’d gold my own.
But oh! be mine the rosy braid,
The fervor of my brows to ihade;
The German poet Lessing has imitated this ode. Vol. 1. p. 24.”
Degen—Gail de £ditkmibus.
Baxter conjectures that this was written upon the occasion of our poet’s
returning the money to Polycrates, according to the anecdote in Stobaeus.
I care not for the idle state
Of Persia's king,	“ There is a fragment of Archilochus in Plutarch,
“ de tranquillitate animi,” which our poet has very closely imitated here—
It begins
Ου μη τλ Γυγιω τα ιτολυχρυ<η» juiXci.”	Barnes.
In one of the monkish imitators of Anacreon we find the same thought—
Ϋυχη ψι» tpttru,
Τι rot 3*λι»ί yutv9«t;
θίλο{ Tuytw, τ« ΧΛΙ TA }
Be minfe the odours, richly sighing,
Amidst my hoary tresses flying.
To day I’ll haste to quaff my wine,
As if to-morrow ne’er should ihine;
Be mine the odours, richly sighing,
Amidst my hoary tresses flyingIn the original) pvpotov	Wwtii».
On account of this idea of perfuming the beard, Cornelius de Fauw
pronounces the whole ode to be the spurious production of some las-
civious monk, who was nursing his beard with unguents. But he should
have known, that this was an ancient eastern custom, which, if we may
believe Savary, still exists—“ Vous voyez, Monsieur, (says this traveller)
que l’usage antique de se parfumer la t^te et la barbe,* cilebri par le pro-
phete Roi, subsiste encore de nos jours;” Lettre 12. Savaty likewise cites
this very ode of Anacreon—Angerianus has not thought this idea incon-
sistent ; he has introduced it in the following lines
\
Haec mihi cura, rosis et cingere tempora myrto,
Et curas multo delapidare mero.
Haec mihi cura, comas et barbam tingere succo
Assyrio et dulces continuare jocos.
This be my care, to twine the rosy wreath,
And drench my sorrows in the ample bowl;
To let my beard th’ Assyrian unguent breathe,
And give a loose to levity of soul!
*	“ Sicut unguentum in capite quod descendit in barbam. Aaron, Pseaume 132.”
But if to-morrow comes, why then—
I’ll haste to quaff my wine again.
And thus while all our days are bright,
Nor Time has dimm’d their bloomy light,
Let us the festal hours beguile,
With mantling cup and cordial smile;
And shed from every bowl of wine
The richest drop on Bacchus* shrine 1
For death may come, with brow unpleasant,
May come, when least we wish him present,
And beckon to the sable shore,
And grimly bid us—drink no more!
ODE DC.
I PRAY thee, by the gods above,
Give me the mighty bowl I love,
And let me sing, in wild delight,
“ I will—I will be mad to night!”
Alcmaeon once, as legends tell,
Was frenzied by the fiends of hell;
Orestes too, with naked tread,
Frantic pac’d the mountain-head;
But ’twas a murder’d mother’s shade,
That on their guilty bosom prey’d.
Now I can ne’er a murderer be,
The grape alone shall bleed by me ;
Yet can I rave, in wild delight,
“ I will—I will be mad to night.”
The poet here is in a frenzy of enjoyment, and it is, indeed, “ amabilis
insania.”
The son of Jove, in days of yore,
Imbru’d his hands in youthful gore,
And brandish’d, with a maniac joy,
The quiver of th’ expiring boy.
And Ajax, with tremendous shield,
Infuriate scour’d the guiltless field—
But I, whose hands no quiver hold,
No weapon but this flask of gold;
The trophy of whofe frantic hours
Is but a scatter’d wreath of flowers;
Yet, yet can sing with wild delight,
“ I will—I will be mad to night !”—
ODE X.
TELL me how to punish thee,
For the mischief done to me ?
Silly swallow I—prating thing,
Shall I clip that wheeling wing ?
This ode is addressed to a swallow. I find from Degen and from Gail’s
index, that the German poet, Weisse, has imitated it, Scherz. Lieder.
lib. ii. carm. 5. That Ratnler also has imitated it, Lyr. Blumenlese,
lib. iv. p. 335 ; and some others. See Gail de editionibus.
We are referred by Degen to that most stupid book, the Epistled of
Alciphron, tenth epistle, third book; where Iophon complains to Erastoh
of being wakened by the crowing of a cock, from his vision of riches.
Silly swallow !—-prating thing, 6fc.] The loquacity of the swallow was
proverbialized—thus Nicostratus—
Ei το συνιχως κα» πολλά xxt τα,γιως λαλιιρ
Ην τη φρονιιν πχρχ<τη/χον, xt χίλιίονες
Ελίγοντ χν τιμών <τωφρovertpxi ττολυ.
If in prating from morning till night,
A sign of our wisdom there be j
The swallows are wiser by right,
For they prattle much faster than we.
Or as Tereus did of old,
(So the fabled tale is told)
Shall I tear that tongue away,
Tongue that utter’d such a lay 1
How unthinking hast thou been 1
Long before the dawn was seen,
When I slumber’d in a dream,
(Love was the delicious theme !)
Just when I was nearly blest,
Ah ! thy matin broke my rest 1
Or as Terms did of old, δΛ\] Modern poetry has confirmed the name of
Philomel upon the nightingale; but many very respectable Ancients assign-
ed this metamorphose to Progne, and made Philomel the swallow, as Ana.
creon does here.
ODE XI.
“ TELL me, gentle youth, I pray thee,
u What in purchase shall I pay thee,
“ For this little waxen toy,
“ Image of the Paphian boy?”
Thus I said, the other day,
To a youth who pass’d my way,
“ Sir,” (he answer’d—and the while
Answer’d all in Doric style)
“ Take it—for a trifle take it—
“ Think not yet that I could make it;
“ Pray—believe it was not I—
“ No—it cost me many a sigh,
It is difficult to preserve with any grace the narrative simplicity of this
ode, and the humour of the turn with which it concludes. I feel that
the translation must appear very vapid, if not ludicrous, to an English
reader.
“ And I can no longer keep
“ Little gods, who murder sleep 1”
“ Here, then, here—(I said with joy)
“ Here is silver for the boy.
“ He shall be my bosom guest,
“ Idol of my pious breast 1”
Little Love I thou now art mine,
Warm me with that torch of thine;
Make me feel as I have felt,
Or thy waxen frame shall melt.
I must bum in warm desire,
Or thou, my boy, in yonder fire 1
And I can no longer keep
Little gods, who murder sleep /] I have not literally rendered the epi-
thet TrxtToptxTx; if it has any meaning here, it is one, perhaps, better
omitted.
I must bum in warm desire,
Or thou, my boy, in yonder fire /] Monsieur Longepierre conjectures from
this, that whatever Anacreon might say, he sometimes felt the inconveni-
ences of old age, and here solicits from the power of Love a warmth which
he could no longer expect from Nature.
ODE XII.
THEY tell how Atys, wild with love,
Roams the mount and haunted grove;
Cybele’s name he howls around—
The gloomy blast returns the sound 1
Oft too by Claros’ hallow’d spring,
The votaries of the laurell’d king
They tell how Atys, wild with love,
Roams the mount and haunted grove;] There are many contradictory
stories of the loves of Cybele and Atys. It is certain that he was muti-
lated, but whether by his own fury, or her jealousy, is a point which au-
thors are not agreed upon. I have seen (I believe in the description of the
Mensa Isiaca, by Laurentius Pignorius) an image of Atys, half-man and
half-woman, of which the attitude is rather unseemly.
Cybele's name he howls around\	I have adopted the accentuation
which Elias Andreas gives to Cybele.
In montibus Cybelen
Magno sonans boatu.
Oft too by Claros’ hallow'd spring, ©V.] This fountain was in a grove,
consecrated to Apollo, and situated between Colophon and Lebed os, in
Quaff the inspiring, magic stream,
And rave in wild prophetic dream.
But frenzied dreams are not for me—
Great Bacchus is my deity!
Full of mirth, and full of him,
While waves of perfume round me swim;
While flavor’d bowls are full supplied,
And you sit blushing by my side,
I will be mad and raving too—
Mad, my girl! with love for you 1
Ionia. The god had an oracle there. Scaliger has thus alluded to it in
his Anacreontics
Semel ut concitus oestro,
Veluti qui Clarias aquas,
Ebibere loquaces,
Quo plus canunt, plura volunt.
ODE XIII.
I WILL—I will—the conflict’s past,
And I’ll consent to love at last—
Cupid has long, with smiling art,
Invited me to yield my heart;
And I have thought that peace of mind,
Should not be for a smile resign’d;
And I’ve repell’d the tender lure,
And hop’d my heart should sleep secure—
But, slighted in his boasted charms,
The angry infant flew to arms;
He slung his quiver’s golden frame,
He took his bow, his shafts of flame,
And proudly summon’d me to yield,
Or meet him on the martial field.
And what did I unthinking do ?
I took to arms undaunted too.
And what did I unthinking do f
J took to arms, undaunted too.] Longepierre has quoted an epigram from
Array’d with corslet, shield and spear,
Pelides* self, I smil’d at fear,
And (hear it—all you powers above 1)
I fought with Love!—I fought with Love I
the Anthologia, in which the poet assumes Reason as the armour againft
Love.
Ω,πλίΓμοιι προς ίρωτα πιρι ffpvom λνγι<Γ[χον,
' Ovit fjLt yixiKTH, μονος tm προς iva,
θνχτος t ’αθα^ατω (Γυ^λιυσ-ο^α*. r\v it βοτ&ο*
Βάκχο* τι μονος προς ίυ ιγω fwa/AXi ;
With Reason I cover my breast as a shield,
And fearlessly meet little Love in the field ;
Thus fighting his godship, I’ll ne’er be dismay’d,
But if Bacchus should ever advance to his aid,
Alas ! then unable to combat the two,
Unfortunate warrior! what should 1 do ?
This idea of the irresistibility of Cupid and Bacchus united, is delicately
expressed in an Italian poem, which is so very Anacreontic, that I may be
pardoned for introducing it. Indeed, it is an imitation of our poet’s 6th
ode.
Lavossi Amore in quel vicino fiume
Ove giuro (Pastor) che bevcnd ’!o
Bevci le fiamme, anzi l’istesso Dio,
C’hor con I’humide piume
And now his arrows all were shed—
And now I just in terrors fled—
When, heaving an indignant sigh,
To see me thus unwounded fly,
Lascivetto mi scherza al cor intorno—
Ma che sarei s’io lo bevessi un giorno
Bacco, nel tuo liquore ?
Sarei, piu che non sono ebro d’Amore*
The urchin of the bow and quiver
Was bathing in a neighbouring rivery
Where, as I drank on yester-eve,
(Shepherd-youth ! the tale believe)
’Twas not a cooling, chrystal draught,
’Twas liquid flame I madly quaff’d—
For Love was in the rippling tide,
I felt him to my bosom glide.
And now the wily, wanton minion
Plays o’er my heart with restless pinion—
This was a day, of fatal star,
But were it not more fatal far,
If, Bacchus, in thy cup of fire,
I found this flutt’ring, young desire ?
Then—then indeed my soul should prove,
Much more than ever, drunk with love !
And, having left no other dart,
He glanc’d himself into my heart I
My heart—alas! the luckless day 1
Receiv’d the God and died away—
Then oh ! farewell—my faithless shield!
Thy hero now is forc’d to yield.
Vain—vain is every outward care,
My foe’s within and triumphs there.
And, having left no other dart,
He glanc'd himfelf into my heart /] Dryden has parodied this thought in
the following extravagant lines:—
----I’m all o’er Love—
Nay—I am Love—Love shot, and shot so fast,
He shot himself into my breast at last.
ODE XIV.
COUNT me, on the summer trees,
Every leaf that courts the breeze;
Count me, on the foamy deep,
Eveiy wave that sinks to sleep;
The poet, in this catalogue of his mistresses, means nothing more than
by a lively hyperbole to tell us, that his heart, unfettered by any one ob-
ject, was warm with devotion towards the sex in general. Cowley is in-
debted to this ode for the hint of his ballad, called “ The Chronicle”—
and the learned Monsieur Menage has imitated it in a Greek Anacreon-
tic, which has so much ease and spirit, that the reader may not be dis-
pleased at seeing it here—
Προς B ιωνα,
Ει αλσιων τα φύλλα,
Aiijuwigf τι ποιας,
Ει νυχτος αςρα παντα,
Παρακτ**? τ$ ψαρ/Αχς,
‘Aλος τε κυματ«Jtj,
Αννη, Βιών, apiOjuiιν,
Και τπς εμχς έρωτας
Αυνη Β*ων αρΑμειν·
KopWy γυναίκα, Χιιραν^
Then, when you have number’d these
Billowy tides and leafy trees,
Count me all the fiames I prove,
All the gentle nymphs I love—
2)utxpw, Mitrriv, Mtyirw>
Afuxn» τι και ΜιλαιρΜ',
OpuxSai, Nxvxixf,
Nnpmiaj rt τγαμγet?
‘Ο νος f ιλ«; f ιληιτι.
Πάντων χορος /mv if*»—
Aurqv nw Epwruv
Aanroimv AfpcA-niv,
Xpucw, ΚΜλιιν, γλυχιιαν,
Epcwpw, ir$9tm»f
An i*eimv fiXnreu
Εγωγι f*i\ itvauftrp.
Tell the foliage of the woods,
Tell the billows of the floods,
Number midnight’s starry store,
And the sands that crowd the shore;
Then, my Bion, thou may’st count
Of my loves the vast amount!
I’ve been loving, all my days,
Many nymphs, in many ways.
First—of pure Athenian maids
Sporting in their olive shades,
You may reckon just a score,
Nay, I’ll grant you fifteen more.
Virgin—widow—maid and wife— .
I’ve been doating all my life.
Naiads, Nereids, nymphs of fountains,
Goddesses of groves and mountains—
Fair and sable—great and small—
Yes—I swear I’ve lov’d them all!
Every passion soon was over,
I was but the moment’s lover—
Oh ! I’m such a roving elfj
That the Queen of Love herselfj
Tho’ she practis’d all her wiles,
Rosy blushes—-golden smiles—
All her beauty’s proud endeavour
Could not chain my heart for ever 1
Count me, on the summer trees,
Every leaf, &c.~\ This figure is called, by the rhetoricians, uivmrov, and
is very frequently made use of in poetry—the amatoiy writers have ex-
hausted a world of imagery by it, to express the infinity of kisses, which
they require from the lips of their mistresses—In this Catullus led the
way.
In the sweet Corinthian grove,
Where the glowing wantons rove,
Chains of beauties may be found,
Chains, by which my heart is bound;
—Quam sidera multa, cum tacet nox,
Furtivos hominum vident amores ;
Tam te basia multa, Scc.
As many stellar eyes of light,
As thro* the silent waste of night,
Gazing upon this world of shade,
Witness some secret youth and mud,
Who fair as thou, and fond as I,
In stolen bliss, enamour'd lie !
So many kisses, ere I slumber,
Upon those vermil lips I’ll number.
In the sweet Corinthian grove,
Where the glowing wantons rove, fisfc.] Corinth was very famous for the
beauty and the number of its courtezans. Venus was the deity principally
worshipped by the people, and prostitution in her temple was a meritorious
act of religion. Conformable to this was their constant and solemn prayer,
that the gods would increase the number of their courtezans. We may
perceive from the application of the verb	(vide	Aristophan.)
that the wantonness of the Corinthians became proverbial.
There indeed are girls divine,
Dangerous to a soul like mine !
Many bloom in Lesbos’ isle;
Many in Ionia smile;
Rhodes a pretty swarm can boast;
Caria too contains a host.
Sum these all—of brown and fair
You may count two thousand there !
What, you gaze ?—I pray you, peace!
More I’ll find before I cease—
Have I told you all my flames,
’Mong the amorous Syrian dames ?
Have I number’d every one,
Glowing under Egypt’s sun ?
There indeed are girls divine,
Dangerous to a soul like mine /]	“ With justice has the poet attributed
beauty to the women of Greece.” Degen.
Monsieur de Pauw, the author of Dissertations upon the Greeks, is of a
different opinion ; he thinks that by a capricious partiality of nature, the
other sex had all the beauty, and accounts upon this supposition for a very
singular depravation of instinct amongft them.
Or the nymphs, who blushing sweet
Deck the shrine of Love in Crete;
Where the God, with festal play,
Holds eternal holiday!
Still in clusters, still remain
Gades’ warm, desiring train;
Still there lies a myriad more
On the sable India’s shore;
These, and many far remov’d,
All are loving—all are lov’d I
Gades' inarm, desiring train;] The Gaditanian girls were like the Ba-
ladieres of India, whose dances are thus described by a French author—
“ Les danses sont presque toutes des pantomimes d’amour; le plan, le des-
sein^les attitudes, les mesures, les sons et les cadences de ces ballets, tout
respire cette passion et en exprime les voluptds et les fureurs.” Histoire
du commerce des Europ. dans les deux Indes. Raynal.
The mufic of the Gaditanian females had all the voluptuous character
of their dancing, as appears from Martial—
Cantica qui Nili, qui Gaditana susurrat. Lib. iii. Epig. 63.
Lodovico Ariosto had this ode of our bard in his mind, when he wrote
his poem “ De diversis amoribus.” See the Anthologia Italorum.
ODE XV.
TELL me, why, my sweetest dove,
Thus your humid pinions move,
Shedding through the air in showers
Essence of the balmiest flowers ?
Tell me whither, whence you rove—
Tell me all—my sweetest dove.
The dove of Anacreon, bringing a letter from the poet to his mistress,
is met by a stranger with whom this dialogue is imagined.
The ancients made use of letter-carrying pigeons, · when they went any
distance from home, as the most certain means of conveying intelligence
back. That tender domestic attachment, which attracts this delicate little
jbird through every danger and difficulty, until it settles in it’s native nest,
affords to the elegant author of “ The Pleasures of Memory,” a fine and
interesting exemplification of his subject.
Led by what chart, transports the timid dove,
The wreaths of conquest, or the vows of love ?
See the poem. Daniel Heinsius has a similar sentiment—speaking of
•Dousa, who adopted this method at the siege of Leyden.
.	Quo	patriae	non	tendit amor ? Mandata referre
Postquam hominem nequiit mittere, misit avem.
Curious stranger 1 I belong
To the bard of Teian song;
With his mandate now I fly
To the nymph of assure eye;
Ah ! that eye has madden’d many,
But the poet more than any 1
Venus for a hymn of love,
Warbled in her votive grove,
Ah / that eye has madden d many, isfc.} For τvpuvw, in the original,
Zeune and Schneider conjecture that we should read tvp«»vt, ία allusion to
the strong influence which this object of hie love held over the mind of
Polycrates. See Degen.
Fenus, for a hymn of lvoe3
Warbled in her votive grove,	w	This passage is invaluable, and I
do not think that any thing bo beautiful or so delicate hn»ever been eaid.
What an idea does it give of the poetry of the man, from whom Venus
herself, the mother of the graces and the pleasures, purchases a little
hymn with one of her favourite doves.” Longepierre.
De Pauw objects to the authenticity of this ode, because it makes Ana-
creon his own panegyrist; but poets havfe a licence for praising themselves,
which, with some indeed, may be considered as comprized under their ge-
neral privilege of fiction.
(’Twas in sooth a gentle lay)
Gave me to the bard away.
See me now his faithful minion:
Thus with softly-gliding pinion,
To his lovely girl I bear
Songs of passion through the air.
Oft he blandly whispers me,
“ Soon, my bird, I’ll set you free.”
But in vain he’ll bid me fly,
I shall serve him ’till I die.
Never could my plumes sustain
Ruffling winds and chilling rain,
O’er the plains, or in the dell,
On the mountain’s savage swell;
Seeking in the desert wood
Gloomy shelter, rustic food.
Now I lead a life of ease,
Far from such retreats as these ;
From Anacreon’s hand I eat
Food delicious, viands sweet;
Flutter o’er his goblet’s brim,
Sip the foamy wine with him.
Then I dance and wanton round
To the lyre’s beguiling sound;
Or with gently-fanning wings
Shade the minstrel while he sings :
On his harp then sink in slumbers,
Dreaming still of dulcet numbers 1
This is all—away—away—
You have made me waste the day.
How I’ve chatter’d 1—prating crow
Never yet did chatter so.
ODE XVI.
Thou, whose soft: and rosy hues
Mimic form, and soul infuse;
Best of painters I come portray
The lovely maid that’s far away.
This ode and the next may be called companion-pictures; they are highly
finished, and give us an excellent idea of the taste of the ancients in beauty.
Franciscus Junius quotes them in his third book, “ De Pictura Veterum.”
This ode has been imitated by Ronsard, Giuliano Goselini, &c. &c.—
Scaliger alludes to it thus in his Anacreontica:—
Olim lepore blando,
Litis versibus
Candidus Anacreon
Quam pingeret Amicus
Descripsit Venerem suam.
The Teian bard, of former days,*
Attun’d his sweet descriptive lays,
And taught the painter’s hand to trace
His fair beloved’s every grace !
In the dialogue of Caspar-Barlaeus, entitled “ An formosa sit ducenda,”
the reader will find many curious ideas and descriptions of beauty.
Far away, my soul! thou art,
But I’ve thy beauties all by heart.
Paint her jetty ringlets straying,
Silky twine in tendrils playing;
Thou, whose soft and rosy hues
Mimic form, and soul infuse;] I have followed the reading of the Vatican
M S. fotm. Painting is called “ the rosy art,” either in reference to co-
louring, or as an indefinite epithet of excellence, from the association of
beauty with that flower. Salvini has adopted this reading in his literal
translation—
Della rosea arte signore.
Paint her jetty ringlets straying^
Silky twine in tendrils playing;] The ancients have been very enthu-
siastic in their praises of hair. Apuleius, in the second book of his Milesiacs,
says, that Venus herself, if she were bald, though surrounded by the graces
and the loves, could not be pleasing even to her husband Vulcan.
Stcsichorus gave the epithet χαλλιπλοκα^ο; to the Graces, and Simonides
bestowed the same upon the Muses. See Hadrian Junius's Dissertation
upon Hair.
To this passage of our poet, Selden alluded in a note on the Polyolbion
of Drayton, song the second, where observing, that the epithet “ black-
haired” was given by some of the ancients to the goddess Isis, he says—
“ Nor will I swear, but that Anacreon (a man very judicious in the pro-
voking motives of wanton love), intending to bestow on his sweet mistress
And, if painting hath the skill,
To make the spicy balm distill,
Let every little lock exhale
A sigh of perfume on the gale.
Where her tresses’ curly flow
Darkles o’er the brow of snow,
Let her forehead beam to light,
Burnish’d as the ivory bright.
Let her eye~brows sweetly rise
In jetty arches o’er her eyes,
Gently in a crescent gliding,
Just commingling—just dividing.
that one of the titles of womens* special ornament, well-haired (κ*λλι*λσ-
χλ[λof), thought of this when he gave his painter direction to make her
black-haired.*'
And, if feinting hath the skill,
To make the spicy bobn distill, &fc.] Thus Philostratus, speaking of a pic-
ture—tram) x«i re* tvfpoirot rm pt>uxi φψ,ι yvypaqAn» *υτ« (αιτλ τ«κ wpi*.
“ I admire the dewiness of these roses, and could say that their very smell
was painted.”
But hast thou any sparkles warm,
The lightning of her eyes to form ?
Let them effuse the azure ray,
With which Minerva’s glances play,
And give them all that liquid fire,
That Venus’ languid eyes respire.
And give them all that liquid fire,
That Venus' languid eyes respire^ Marchetti explains thus the υγρόν of
the original:—
Dipingili umidetti
Tremuli e lascivetti,
Quai gli ha Ciprigna Palma Dea d’Amore.
Tasso has painted thus the eyes of Armida, as La Fosse remarks—
Quai raggio in onda le scintilla un riso
Negli umidi occhi tremulo e lascivo.
Within her humid, melting eyes
A brilliant ray of laughter lies,
Soft as the broken, solar beam,
That trembles in the azure stream.
The mingled expression of dignity and tenderness, which Anacreon re-
quires the painter to infuse into the eyes of his mistress, is more amply de-
scribed in the subsequent ode. Both descriptions are so exquisitely touched,
that the artift mufl have been great indeed, if he did not yield in painting
to the poet.
O’er her nose and cheek be shed,
Flushing white and mellow’d red;
Gradual tints—as when there glows
In snowy milk the bashful rose.
Then her lip—so rich in blisses!
Sweet petitioner for kisses 1
Gradual tints—as when there glows
In snowy milk the bashful rose.] Thus Propertius, eleg. 3. lib. ii.
Utque roese puro lacte natant folia.
And Davenant, in a little poem called “ the Mistress"—
Catch as it falls the Scythian snow,
Bring blushing roses steep’d in milk.
Thus too Taygetus—
Quae lac atque rosas vincis candore rubenti.
These last words may perhaps defend the “ flushing white” of the translation.
Then her lip—so rich in blisses !
Sweet petitioner for kisses /J The “ lip, provoking kisses,” in the origi-
nal, is a strong and beautiful expression. Achilles Tatius speaks of χπλ*»
/καλβαχα ττροζ rx φιλη[χ»τ»—" Lips soft and delicate for kissing.” A grave
old commentator, Dionysius Lambinus, in his notes upon Lucretius, tells
us with all the authority of experience, that girls who have large lips kiss
infinitely sweeter than others! “ Suavius viros osculantur puellae labiosae,
quam quae sunt brevibus labris.” ^Eneas Sylvius, in his tedious uninterest-
Pouting nest of bland persuasion,
Ripely suing Love’s invasion.
Then beneath the velvet chin,
Whose dimple shades a love within,
Mould her neck, with grace descending,
In a heaven of beauty ending;
While airy charms, above—below,
Sport and flutter on it’s snow.
ing story of the adulterous loves of Euryalus and Lucretia, where he par-
ticularizes the beauties of the heroine (in a very false and laboured stile of
latinity), describes her lips as exquisitely adapted for biting. “ Os parvum
decensque, labia corallini coloris ad morsum aptissima.” Epist. 114. lib. i.
Then beneath the velvet chin,
Whose dimple shades a love within,	Madame Dacier has quoted here
two pretty lines of Varro—
Sigilla in mento impressa Amoris digitulo
Vestigio demonstrant mollitudinem.
In her chin is a delicate dimple,
By the finger of Cupid imprest;
There softness, bewitchingly simple,
Has chosen her innocent nest.
Now let a floating, lucid veil
Shadow her limbs, but not conceal;
A charm may peep, a hue may beam,
And leave the rest to Fancy’s dream*
Enough—’tis she—’tis all I seek—
It glows, it lives, it soon will speak!
Now let a floating, lucid veil,
Shadow her limbs, but not conceal; &c.~\ This delicate art of description,
which leaves imagination to complete the picture, has been seldom adopt-
ed in the imitations of this beautiful poem. Ronsard is exceptionably mi-
nute ; and Politianus, in his charming portrait of a girl, full of rich and
exquisite diction, has lifted the veil rather too much. The “ questo che
tu m’ intendi” should be always left to fancy.
ODE XVII.
AND now, with all thy pencil’s truth,
*	Λ
Portray Bathyllus, lovely youth 1
Let his hair, in lapses bright,
Fall like streaming rays of light;
And there the raven’s die confuse
With the yellow sunbeam’s hues.
Let not the braid, with artful twine
The flowing of his locks confine;
The reader, who wishes to acquire an accurate idea of the judgment
of the ancients in beauty, will be indulged by consulting Junius de Pictura
Veterum, ninth chapter, third book, where he will find a very curious
selection of descriptions and epithets of personal perfections^—he compares
this ode with a description of Theodoric, king of the Goths, in the second
epistle, first book of Sidonius Apollinaris.
Let his hair, in lapses bright,
Fall like streaming rays of light; &c.~) He here describes the sunny hair,
“ the flava coma,” which the ancients so much admired. The Romans
gave this colour artificially to their hair. See Stanisl. Kobienzyck. de luxu
Romanorum.
t
But loosen every golden ring,
To float upon the breeze’s wing.
Beneath the front of polish’d glow,
Front, as fair as mountain-snow,
And guileless as the dews of dawn,
Let the majestic brows be drawn,
Of ebon dies, enrich’d by gold,
Such as the scaly snakes unfold.
Mingle, in his jetty glances,
Power that awes, and love that trances;
Front, as fair as mountain snow,
And guileless as the dews of dawn, €Λ:.] Torrentius, upon the words “ in-
signem tenui fronte,” in the thirty-third ode of the first book of Horace, is
of opinion that " tenui” bears the meaning of αταλο* here; but he is cer-
tainly incorrect.
Mingle in his jetty glances,
Power that awes, and love that trances;	Tasso gives a similar cha-
racter to the eyes of Clorinda—
Lampeggiar gli occhi, e folgorar gli sguardi
Dolci ne l’ira.
Her eyes were glowing with a heavenly heat,
i "
Emaning fire, and ev’n in anger sweet!
Steal from Venus bland desire,
Steal from Mars the look of fire,
Blend them in such expression here,
That we by turns may hope and fear 1
The poetess Veronica Cambara is more diffuse upon this variety of ex-
pression—
Occhi lucenti c belli
Come esser puo ch* in un medesmo istante
Nascan de voi si nove forme et tante ?
Lieti, mesti, superbi, humil’ altieri
Vi mostrate in un punto, onde di speme,
Et di timor ne empiete, &c. &c.
Oh ! tell me, brightly-beaming eye,
Whence in your little orbit lie
So many different traits of fire,
Expressing each a new desire.
Still with angry scorn you darkle,
Still with tender languish sparkle,
And we who view the various mirror,
Feel at once both hope and terror.
Monsieur Chevreau, citing the lines of our poet, in his critique on the
poems of Malherbe, produces a latin version of them from a manuscript
which he had seen, entitled “ Joan. Falconis, Anacreontic! lusus.”
Now from the sunny apple seek
The velvet down that spreads his cheek;
And there let Beauty’s rosy ray
In flying blushes richly play;
Blushes, of that celestial flame
Which lights the cheek of virgin shame.
Then for his lips, that richly gem—-
But let thy mind imagine them 1
Paint, where the ruby cell uncloses,
Persuasion sleeping upon roses ;
And give his lip that speaking air,
As if a word was hovering there !
His neck of ivory splendor trace,
Moulded with soft but manly grace ;
Fair as the neck of Paphia’s boy,
Where Paphia’s arms have hung in joy.
And give his lip that speaking air,
As if a word was hovering there /] In the original λάλων <ηωτ*. The mis-
tress of Petrarch “ parla con silentio,” which is perhaps the best method
of female eloquence.
Give him the winged Hermes* hand,
With which he waves his snaky wand;
Let Bacchus then the breast supply,
And Leda’s son the sinewy thigh.
But oh! suffuse his limbs of fire
With all that glow of young desire,
Give him the winged Hermes' handy £&:.] In Shakespeare's Cymbeline there
is a similar method of description—
-----this is his hand
His foot mercurial—his martial thigh,
The brawns of Hercules-—
We find it likewise in Hamlet. Longepierre thinks that the hands of
Mercury are selected by Anacreon, on account of the graceful gestures
which were supposed to characterize the god of eloquence; but Mercury
was also the patron of thieves, and may perhaps be praised as a light-fin-
gered deity.
But oh ! suffuse his limbs of fire
With all the glow of young desire, &c.~\ I have taken the liberty here of
somewhat veiling the original. Madame Dacier, in her translation, has
hung out lights (as Sterne would call it) at this passage. It is very much
to be regretted that this substitution of asterisks has been so much adopted
in the popular interpretations of the Classics; it serves but to bring what-
ever is exceptionable into notice “ claramque facem praeferre pudendis.”
Which kindles» when the wishful sigh
Steals from the heart, unconscious why—
Thy pencil, though divinely bright,
Is envious of the eye's delight,
Or it’s enamour’d touch would show
His shoulder, fair as sunless snow,
Which now in veiling shadow lies,
Remov’d from all but fancy’s eyes—
Now, for his feet—but hold—forbear—
I see a god-like portrait there;
■ ■ —But hold—forbear—
I see a godlike portrait there; &c.] This is very spirited, but it requires
explanation. While the artist is pursuing the portrait of Bathyllus, Ana-
creon, we must suppose, turns round and sees a picture of Apollo, which
was intended for an altar at Samos—he instantly tells the painter to cease
his work; that this picture will serve for Bathyllus; and that, when he goes
to Samoe, he may make an Apollo of the portrait of the boy which he had
begun.
“ Bathyllus (says Madame Dacier) could not be more elegantly praised,
and this one passage does him more honor than the statue, however beau-
tiful it might be, which Polycrates raised to him."
So like Bathyllus 1—sure there’s none,
So like Bathyllus but the sun 1
Oh 1 let this pictur’d god be mine,'
And keep the boy for Samos’ shrine;
Phoebus shall then Bathyllus be,
Bathyllus then the deity 1
ODE XVIII.
r*
NOW the star of day is high,
Fly, my girls, in pity fly,
Bring me wine in brimming urns,
Cool my lip, it bums—it bums !
Sunn'd by the meridian fire,
Panting, languid I expire!
Give me all those humid flowers,
Drop them o’er my brow in showers.
“ An elegant translation of this ode may be found in Ramler’s Lyr.
Blumenlese, lib. v. pag. 403.” Degen.
Bring me wine, in brimming urns, &c.~\ Orig. τκι» #/&<*·». “ The amystis
was a method of drinking used among the Thracians. Thus Horace—
“ Threicii vincat amystide.” Mad. Dacier, Longepierre, &c. &c.
Parrhasius, in his twenty-sixth epistle (Thesaur. Critic, vol. 1.) explains
the amystis as a draught to be exhausted without drawing breath, “ uno
haustu.” A note in the margin of this epistle of Parrhasius says, “ Poli-
tianus vestem esse putabat,” but I cannot find where.
Give me all those humid flowers,	By the original reading of this line,
Scarce a breathing chaplet now
Lives upon my feverish brow;
Every dewy rose I wear
Sheds it’s tears, and withers there.
the poet says, α Give me the flower of wine”—Date flosculos Lyaei, as it
is in the version of Elias Andreas; and
Deh porgetimi del fiore
Di quel almo e buon liquore,
as Regnier has it, who supports th<? reading. Α»Λβς would undoubtedly
bear this application, which is somewhat similar to it’s import in the epi-
gram of Simonides upon Sophocles.
Ee&odw ytp&u ZofoxXttf, utfof om&w.
And floe in the Latin is frequently applied in this manner—thus Cethegus
is called by Ennius.
Flos inlibatus populi, suadaeque medulla.
'* The immaculate flower of the people, and the very marrow of per-
suasion.” See those verses, cited in the “ Noctes Atticae,” lib. xii. Cicero
praised them, and Seneca thought them ridiculous.
But if we admit num», according to Faber’s conjecture, the sense is
sufficiently clear, and we need not have recourse to refinements.
Every dewy rose I wear
Sheds it's tears and withers there."] There are some beautiful lines, by
Angerianus, upon a garland, which I cannot resist quoting here—
But for you, my burning mind I
Oh 1 what shelter shall I find ?
Can the bowl, or flowret’s dew,
Cool the flame that scorches you ?
Ante fores madidae sic sic pendete corollae,
Mane orto imponet Caelia vos capiti;
At quum per niveam cervicem influxerit humor,
Dicite, non roris sed pluvia haec lacrimae.
By Celia’s arbour all the night
Hang, simple wreath, the lover’s row—
And haply, at the morning light,
My love shall twine thee round her brow.
Then, if upon her bosom bright,
Some drops of dew shall fall from thee,
Tell her, they are not drops of night,
But tears of sorrow shed by me 1
In the poem of Mr. Sheridan’s—“ Uncouth is this moss-cover’d grotto
of stone,” there is an idea very singularly coincident with , this of Angeri-
anus, in the stanza which begins—
And thou stony grot in thy arch may’st preserve.
But for you, my burning rmnd /	The	transition here is .peculiarly
delicate and impassioned; but the commentators have perplexed the sen-
timent by a variety of readings and conjectures.
ODE XIX.
HERE recline you, gentle maid,
Sweet is this imbowering shade;
Sweet the young, the modest trees,
Ruffled by the kissing breeze!
The description of this bower is so natural and animated, that we cannot
help feeling a degree of coolness and freshness, while we read it. Longe-
pierre has quoted from the first book of the Anthologia, the following epi-
gram, as somewhat resembling this ode
ΕρχίΟ X«t XXT tftMV !£tu XITVff » TO [Λίλιχρον
Προς /χαλαχχς ηχιι χιχλιρινα ζιφνρχς.
Hviit xcu κρκνκτ(ΛΛ //,ίλ^χγις, tvix (Atkwiuv
Hiuv tpifJuuxK virvov χγω χαλαροί;.
Come, sit by the shadowy pine,
That covers my sylvan retreat;
And see how the branches incline
The breathing of zephyr to meet.
See the fountain, that flowing, diffuses
Around me a glittering spray ;
By it’s brink as the traveller muses,
I soothe him to sleep with my lay 1
Sweet the little founts that weep,
Lulling bland the mind to sleep;
Hark ! they whisper as they roll,
Calm persuasion to the soul 1
Here recline you, gentle maid,	The Vatican MS. reads βαβυλλχ,
which renders the whole poem metaphorical. Some commentator suggests
the reading of (3*3νλλβν, which makes a pun upon the name; a grace that
Plato himself has condescended to in writing of his boy «pip. See the epi-
gram of this philosopher, which I quote on the twenty^second ode.
There is another epigram by this philosopher, preserved in Laertius,
which turns upon the same word.
Αριρ πριν (xtv tXafAwtt an ζωοιη» imoc
Nw ft Qavuv, λάμπας ίπτιρος u φθι/ΛΟΌΚ.
In life thou wert my morning-star,
But now that death has stol’n thy light,
Alas ! thou shinest dim and far,
Like the pale beam that weeps at night.
In the Veneres Blyenburgicse, under the head of “ allusiones, ” we find
a number of such frigid conceits upon names, selected from the poets of
the middle ages.
Tell me—tell me, is not this
All a stilly scene of bliss ?
Who, my girl, would pass it by ?
Surely neither you nor I!
fVko, my girl, would pass it by f
Surely neither you nor If] What a finish he gives to the picture by the
simple exclamation of the original. In these delicate turns he is inimit-
able ; and yet, bear what a French translator says on the passage-—" This
oonclueion appeared to me too trifling after such a description, and I thought
proper to add somewhat to the strength of the original.”
ODE XX.
ONE day, the Muses twin'd the hands
Of baby Love, with flow’ry bands;
By this allegory of the Moses making Cupid the prisoner of beauty,
Anacreon seems to insinuate the softening influence, which a cultivation
of poetry has over the.mind, in making it peculiarly susceptible to the im-
pressions of beauty.
Though in the following epigram, by the philosopher Plato, which is
found in the third book of Diogenes Laertius, the Muses are made to dis-
avow all the influence of Love.
'A Ktnrpic Mstraurt, xopxetx root Afpoitrcu
Tt/uutr 4 τον Ερωτα ΰppt» ιφοτλκτομ,χι.
’At Motrxt 7Γ0Τ» Kvirpw. Apu rx Γ»ρυλ* rxvrx
ΉfMV * irtrxTXi ttto to irxiJxptor.
“ Yield to my gentle power, Parnassian maids,”
Thus to the Muses spoke the Queen of Charms—
“ Or Love shall flutter in your classic shades,
“ And make your grove the camp of Paphian arms !”
“ No,” said the virgins of the tuneful bower,
“We scorn thine own and all thy urchin's art,
“ Tho’ Mars has trembled at the infant’s power,
“ His shaft is pointless o’er a Muse’s heart!”
And to celestial Beauty gave
The captive infant as her slave.
There is a sonnet by Benedetto Guidi, the thought of which was sug-
gested by this ode—
Scherzava dentro all* auree chiome Amore
Dell* alma doona della tita mia:
£ tanto era il piacer ch’ ei ne eentia,
Che non sapea, n6 vdea usdme fore.
Qnando ecco ivi annodar ή sente il core,
SI, cbe per forza ancor conTieo die stift:
Tai lacci alta beltate orditi avia
Del crespo cno, per farsi ctcmo ooorc,
Onde offre infin dal del degna mercede,
A chi scioglie il figlinol la bdla dea
Da tanti nodi, in ch* ella stretto il vede.
Ma ei vinto a due occbi l’anne cede:
£ t’affaticbi indarno, Citerea;
Che s* ahri *1 scioglie, egli a legar si riede.
Love, wandering thro’ the golden maze
. Of my beloved’s hair,
Trac’d every lock with food delays,
And doating, linger’d there.
His mother comes with many a toy,
To ransom her beloved boy;
His mother sues—but all in vain—
He ne’er will leave his chains again.
And soon he found ’twere vain to fly,
His heart was close confin’d ;
And ev’ry curlet was a tie,
A chain by Beauty twin’d.
Now Venus seeks her boy’s release,
With ransom from above;
But Venus 1 let thy effort* cease,
For Love’s the slave of love.
And, should we loose his golden chain,
The pris'ner would return again 1
His mother comes, with many a toy,
To ransom her beloved boy; &e.~\ Venus thus proclaims the reward for
her fugitive child in the first idyll of Moechus—
*0 jtmwvat ytpat l£«,
ΜισΦο; το», το fiXotjua το Kvirpitof. dv ί’αγαγτκ m
Ου γυμνόν το φίλχ/ΛΧ) τν £ u χχι ηΧιον ίζας.
\
To him, who the haunts of my Cupid can show,
A kiss of the tenderest stamp I’ll bestow ;
Nay, should they take his chains away,
The little captive still would stay.
“ If this” he cries, “ a bondage be,
“ Who could wish for liberty!”
But be, who can bring me the wanderer here,
Shall have something more rapturous, something more dear.
This “ something more” is the quidquid post oscula dulce of Secundus.
After this ode, there follow in the Vatican M S. these extraordinaiy
lines—
HJbjtttXn; Awuifiun
Ηλριλικ it ΣΛτφα
TlwiufiXAV TO it fAOt (Αίλ,ος
Σνγκιρ«urat t»j ιγχιβ»
Τα τ/Μ ταντα pi imu
Και Aiotwof »«λΟ<Ν*
Και Παφιτι ταραχρης
Και «ντο; Ερως χαν m»».
These lines, which appear to me to have as little sense as metre, are
most probably the interpolation of the transcriber.
ODE XXI.
OBSERVE when mother earth is dry,
She drinks the droppings of the sky;
And then the dewy cordial gives
To ev’ry thirsty plant that lives.
The commentators who have endeavoured to throw the chains of precision
over the spirit of this beautiful trifle, require too mu6h from Anacreontic
philosophy. Monsieur Gail very wisely thinks that the poet uses the epithet
ptiuum, because black earth absorbs moisture more quickly than any other;
and accordingly he indulges us with an experimental disquisition on the
subject. See Gail’s notes.
One of the Capilupi has imitated this ode, in an epitaph on a drunkard—
Dum vixi sine fine bibi, sic imbrifer arcus
Sic tellus pluvias sole perusta bibit.
Sic bibit assidud fontes et flumina Pontus,
Sic semper sitiens Sol maris haurit aquas.
Ne te igitur jactes plus me, Silene, bibisse;
Et mihi da victas tu quoque, Bacche, manus.
Hippolytus Capilupus.
The vapours, which at evening weep,
Are beverage to the swelling deep;
And when the rosy sun appears,
He drinks the ocean’s misty tears.
While Life was mine, the little hour
In drinking still unvaried flew;
I drank as earth imbibes the shower,
Or as the rainbow drinks the dew;
As ocean quaffs the rivers up,
Or flushing sun inhales the sea—
Silenus trembled at my cup,
And Bacchus was out-done by me!
I cannot omit citing those remarkable lines of Shakespeare, where the
thoughts of the ode before us are preserved with such striking similitude—
TIMON, Act IV.
——I’ll example you with thievery.
The sun’s a thief, and with his great attraction
Robs the vast sea. The moon's an arrant thief,
And her pale fire she snatches from the sun.
The sea’s a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
The mounds into salt tears. The earth’s a thief,
That feeds, and breeds by a composture stol’n
From general excrements.
The moon too quaffs her paly stream
Of lustre, from the solar beam—
Then, hence with all your sober thinking !
Since Nature’s holy law is drinking;
I’ll make the laws of nature mine,
And pledge the universe in wine 1
ODE XXII.
THE Phrygian rock, that braves the storm,
Was once a weeping matron’s form—
And Progne, hapless, frantic maid,
Is now a swallow in the shade.
Ogilvie, in his essay on the Lyric Poetry of the Ancients, in remarking
upon the Odes of Anacreon, says—“ In some of his pieces there is exuber-
ance and even wildness of imagination ; in that particularly, which is ad-
dressed to a young girl, where he wishes alternately to be transformed to a
mirror, a coat, a stream, a bracelet, and a pair of shoes, for the different
purposes which he recites—this is meer sport and wantonness.”
It is the wantonness however of a very graceful Muse—ludit amabiliter.
The compliment of this ode is exquisitely delicate, and so singular for the
period in which Anacreon lived, when the scale of love had not yet been
graduated into all it’s little progressive refinements, that if we were inclined
to question the authenticity of the poem, we should find a much more
plausible argument in the features of modern gallantry which it bears, than
in any of those fastidious conjectures upon which some commentators have
presumed so far. Degen thinks it spurious, and De Pauw pronounces it to
be miserable. Longepierre and Barnes refer us to several imitations of this
ode, from which I shall only select an epigram of Dionysius—
Oh 1 that a mirror's fown were mine
To sparkle with that smile divine;
And like my heart I *φβιί, should be,
Reflecting thee*andonly. thee 1
*
EiO’ ανψος ynoy-w, συ it yt πιχικτα iretp ανγχς,
Xrrfttx yvfAVumiff xxt f*s irvicvrx λάζοι;.
Ειθι peiov ytvo/xr\v 'νπϋπορφνρον, οφρχ (At χιραΊν
Apx/Atvn, χορκτακ Γ*0*β·» χιοΜβκ·
EtOf xptvov γίνουν λίυχοχροον, οψξχ μι χις<ΤΗ>
Apxptvri, ρΛλλοκ σης χροτιη; xopwjif.
I wish I could like zephyr steal
To wanton o’er thy mazy .vest;
And thou would’st ope thy bosom-veil,
And take me panting to thy breast!
I wish I might a rose-bud grow,
And thou would’st cull me from the bower,
And place me on that breast of snow,
Where I should bloom, a wintry flower.
I wish I were the lilly’s leaf,
To fade upon that bosom warm;
There I should wither, pale and brief,
The trophy of thy fairer form !
Or were I, love, the robe which flows
O’er every charm that secret glows,
In many a lucid fold to swim,
And cling and grow to every limb 1
Oh! could I, as the streamlet’s wave,
Thy warmly-mellowing beauties lave,
Or float as perfume on thine hair,
And breathe my soul in fragrance there I
Allow me to add, that Plato has expressed as fanciful a wish in a distich
preserved by Laertius.
Artpctt iimApuf, arnf ijMf. l«tt γικημην
ΟυξΜος, ως ιτ*λλοΐ(	ut ci βληη*.
TO STBLLA.
Why dost thou gaze upon the sky ?
Oh ! that I were that spangled sphere,
And every star should be an eye,
To wonder on thy beauties here!
Apuleius quotes this epigram of the divine philosopher to justify himself
for his verses on Critias and Charinus. See his Apology, where he also ad-
duces the example of Anacreon—“ Fecere tamen et alii talia, et si vos ig-
noratis, apud Graecos Teius quidam, 6cc. &c.”
I wish I were the zone, that lies
Warm to thy breast, and feels it’s sighs ;
Or like those envious pearls that show
So faintly round that neck of snow,
Yes—I would be a happy gem,
Like them to hang, to fade like them;
What more would thy Anacreon be ?
Oh ! any thing that touches thee.
I wish I were the zone, that lies
Warm to thy breast, and feels it's sighs;] This r»mn was a ribband, or
band, called by the Romans fascia and strophium, which the women wore
for the purpose of restraining the exuberance of the bosom. Vide Polluc.
Onomast. Thus Martial—
FasciA cresentes dominae compesce papillas.
The women of Greece not only wore this zone, but condemned them-
selves to fasting, and made use of certain drugs and powders for the same
purpose. To these expedients they were compelled, in consequence of
their inelegant fashion of compressing the waist into a very narrow com-
pass, which necessarily caused an excessive tumidity in the bosom. See
Dioscorides, lib. v.
Nay, sandals for those airy feet—
Thus to be press’d by thee were sweet 1
Nay, sandals for those airy feet—
Thus to he press'd hy thee were sweet /] The sophist Philostratus, in one
of his love-letters, has borrowed this thought—« α&το» woJif. « χχλλβς ιλ*υ-
3·ιρος. ω rpivtvixifuw νγω χχι μακάριος txv irarwrtrt pt. “ Oh lovely feet ! oh
excellent beauty ! oh ! thrice happy and blessed should I be, if you would
but tread on me!” In Shakespeare, Romeo desires to be a glove—
Oh ! that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might kiss that cheek-------
And, in his Passionate Pilgrim, we meet with an idea somewhat like
that of the thirteenth line—
He, spying her bounc’d in, where as he stood,
O	Jove!—quoth she—why was not I a flood ?
In Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy, that whimsical farrago of “ All
such reading as was never read,” there is a very old translation of this ode,
before 1632.	“ Englished by Mr. B. Holiday in his Technog. act i.
scene 7.”
ODE XXIII.
I OFTEN wish this languid lyre,
This warbler of my soul’s desire,
Could raise the breath of song sublime,
To men of fame, in former time.
But when the soaring theme I try,
Along the chords my numbers die,
And whisper, with dissolving tone,
“ Our sighs are giv’n to love alone 1”
This ode is first in the series of all the editions, and is thought to be
peculiarly designed as an introduction to the rest—it however characterizes
the^gpniu» of the Teian but very inadequately, as wine, the burden of his
lays, is not even mentioned in it—
cum multo Venerem confundere mero
Precepit Lyrici Teia Musa senis.	Ovid.
I	have given rather a paraphrase of this ode; it has been so frequently
translated, that I could not otherwise avoid triteness and repetition.
The twenty-sixth ode <rv μη xtyuf τα Θπ&κ, might with as much pro-
priety be the harbinger of his songs. Bion has expressed the sentiments of
this ode with much simplicity in his fourth idyll.
Indignant at the feeble lay,
I tore the panting chords away,
Attun’d them to a nobler swell,
And struck again the breathing shell—
In all the glow of epic fire,
To Hercules I wake the lyre I
But still it’s fainting sighs repeat,
“ The tale of love alone is sweett”
Then fare thee well, seductive dream,
That mad’st me follow Glory’s theme;
In all the glow of epic fire,
To Hercules I wake the lyre /] Madame Dacier generally translates λυρ*
into a lute, which I believe is rather inaccurate—“ D’expliquer la lyre des
anciens (says Monsieur Sore!) par un luth, c’est ignorer la difference qu’il
y a entre ces deux instrumens de musique.” Bibliotheque Franchise.
But still it's fainting sighs repeat,
“ The tale of love alone is sweet /”] The word αντι?«ν«, in the original,
may imply that kind of musical dialogue practised by the ancients, in which
the lyre was made to respond to the questions proposed by the singer.
This was a method which Sappho used, as we are told by Hermogenes—
“ όταν tuv λύρα» tpuτα Σχττφω χαι όταν αυτη airex/umra»—πψ ittw, τομος &υτ*ροί.”
For thou my lyre, and thou my heart,
Shall never more in spirit part;
And thou the flame shalt feel as well
As thou the flame shalt sweetly tell!
ODE XXIV.
TO all that breathe the airs of heaven,
Some boon of strength has Nature given.
When the majestic bull was bom,
She fenc’d his brow with wreathed horn.
Henry Stephen has imitated the idea of this ode in the following lines of
one of his poems:—
Provida dat cunctis Natura animantibus arma,
Et sua fsemineum possidet arma genus,
Ungul&que ut defendit equum, atque ut cornua taurum,
Armata est form& faemina pulchra su&.
And the same thought occurs in those lines, spoken by Corisca in Pas-
tor Fido—
Cosi noi la bellezza
Ch '6 vertu nostra cosi propria, come
La forza del Leone
E l’ingegno de l’huomo.
She arm’d the courser’s foot of air,
And wing’d with speed the panting hare.
She gave the lion fangs of terror,
And, on the ocean’s chrystal mirror,
Taught the unnumber’d scaly throng
To trace their liquid path along;
While for the umbrage of the grove,
She plum’d the warbling world of love.
To man she gave the flame refin’d,
The spark of heav’n—a thinking mind!
The Lion boasts his savage powers,
And lordly man his strength of mind—
But Beauty’s charm is solely ours,
Peculiar boon, by heaven assign’d !
“ An elegant explication of the beauties of this ode (says Degen), may.
be found in Grimm en den Anmerkk. Veber einige Oden des Anakr.”
To man she gave the flame refind,
The spark of heavn—a thinking mind /] In my first attempt to translate
this ode, I had interpreted φρονιμ», with Baxter and Barnes, as implying;
And had she no surpassing treasure,
For thee, oh woman!—child of pleasure ?
She gave thee beauty—shaft of eyes,
That every shaft of war outflies!
t She gave thee beauty—blush of fire,
That bids the flames of war retire !
•
courage and military virtue; but I do not think that the gallantry of the
idea suffers by the import which I have now given to it. For, why need
we consider this possession of wisdom as exclusive ? and in truth, as the
design of Anacreon is to estimate the treasure of beauty, above all the rest
which Nature has distributed, it is perhaps even refining upon the delicacy
of the complimcnt, to prefer the radiance of female charms to the cold illu-
mination of wisdom and prudeace; and to think that womens’ eyes are
----the books, the academies,
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.,
She gave thee beauty—shaft of eyes,
That every shaft of war outflies /] Thus Achilles Tatius *«λλος cjfuctp·»
-τ»τρω<τχ« β(λ»ί και Λα τον 0φ6αλ/Μ>ν ιΐζ την ψνχτιν χαταρρα. Οφθαλμός yap οίος ipu-
ηχω τραύματά “ Beauty wounds more swiftly than the arrow, and passes
through the eye to the very soul—for the eye is the inlet to the wounds
of love.”
Woman! be fair, 'we must adore thee;
Smile, and a world is weak before thee I
Woman! be fair, we must adore thee'i
Smile, and a world is weak before thee /] Longepierre’s remark here is
I
very ingenious—“ The Romans” (says he) “ were so convinced of the
power of beauty, that they used a word implying strength in the place of
the epithet beautiful. Thus Plautus, act n. scene 2. Bacchid.
Sed Bacchie etiam fortis tibi visa.
“ Fortis, id est fbrmoea,” eay Servius and Nonius.
ODE XXV.
ONCE in each revolving year,
Gentle bird 1—we find thee here.
When Nature wears her summer-vest,
Thou com’st to weave thy simple nest;
But when the chilling winter lowers,
Again thou seek’st the genial bowers
Of Memphis, or the shores of Nile,
Where sunny hours of verdure smile.
And thus thy wing of freedom roves,
Alas 1 unlike the plumed loves,
This is another ode addressed to the swallow. Alberti has i
in one poem, beginning—
Perch' io pianga al tuo canto
Rondinella importuna, &c.
Alas ! unlike the plumed loves,
That linger in this hapless breast,
And never—never change their nest /] Thus Love is made
an epigram cited by Longepierre from the Anthologia.
Di
That linger in this hapless breast,
And never—never change their nest.
Still every year, and all the year,
A flight of loves engender here;
And some their infant plumage try,
And on a tender winglet fly;
While in the shell, impregn’d with fires,
Cluster a thousand more desires;
Some from their tiny prisons peeping,
And some in formless embryo sleeping.
Am /40* tvvti ptv tv bum *ιχοί ιρωτο?,
OfflJM it ιτιγχ ireOotf το γλνχυ iaxpv φιριι.
Ουi* ή ννζ, ου φιγϊος ιχοιμκτιν, «λλ’ υπο φίλτρων
Hit irx xpaim γνωςος ι«γ* tottoj.
Ω irrxm, juii και ίγοτ ιφιπτχιτβχι [ttv tpurtf
Οιίατ, enmr-niwti i' »0’ itron κτχυιτι;
’Tis Love that murmurs in my breast,
And makes me shed the secret tear;
Nor day, nor night my heart has rest,
For night and day his voice I hear.
My bosom, like the vernal groves,
Resounds with little warbling loves;
One urchin imps the other’s feather,
Then twin-desires they wing together,
And still as they have leara’d to soar,
The wanton babies teem with more—
And is there then no kindly art,
To chace these cupids from my heart ?
No—no—I fear—alas I I fear
*
They will for ever nestle here 1
A wound frithin my heart I find,
And oh ! ’tis plain where love has been;
For still he leaves a wound behind.
Such as within my heart is seen.
Oh bird of Love! with song so drear—
Make not my soul the nest of pain;
Oh ! let the wing which brought thee here,
In pity waft thee hence again !
ODE XXVI.
THY harp may sing of Troy’s alarms,
Or tell the tale of Theban arms;
With other wars my song shall bum,
For other wounds my harp shall mourn.
’Twas not the crested warrior’s dart,
Which drank the current of my heart;
Nor naval arms, nor mailed steed,
Have made this vanquish’d bosom bleed;
No—from an eye of liquid blue,
A host of quiver’d cupids flew ;
a
The German poet Uz, has imitated this ode. Compare also Weisse
Scherz. Lieder. lib. iii. der Soldat.” Gail, Degen.
No—-from an eye of liquid blue,
ji host of quiver d cupids flewLongepierre has quoted part of an epi-
gram from the seventh book of the Anthologia, which has a fancy some-
thing like this—
—Ου i*t λιλτ&ας
ΤοζοτΛ, Zrivof ιλα?	χρυπτομοίος.
And now my heart all bleeding lies
Beneath this army of the eyes 1
Archer Love! tho’ slyly creeping,
Well I know where thou dost lie;
I	saw thee thro' the curtain peeping,
That fringes Zenophelia’s eye.
The poets abound with conceits on the archery of the eyes, but few have
tufned the thought so naturally as Anacreon. Ronsard gives to the eyes
of his mistress “ un petit camp d’amours.”
ODE XXVII.
WE read the flying courser’s name
Upon his side, in marks of flame;
And, by their turban’d brows alone,
The warriors of the East are known.
But in the lover’s glowing eyes,
The inlet to his bosom lies;
This ode forms a part of the preceding in the Vatican M S. but I have
conformed to the editions in translating them separately.
“ Compare with this (says Degen) the poem of Ramler Wahrzeichen
der Liebe, in Lyr. Blumenlese. Lib. iv. p. 313.’*
But in the lover's glowing eyes,
The inlet to his bosom lies;] " We cannot see into the heart,” says Ma-
dame Dacier. But the lover answers—
II cor ne gli occhi et ne la fronte ho scritto.
Monsieur La Fosse has given the following lines, as enlarging on the
thought of Anacreon:—
Lorsque je vois un amant,
11	cache en vain son tourment,
Through them we see the small faint mark,
Where Love had dropp’d his burning spark!
»
A le trahir tout conspire,
Sa langueur, son embarras,
Tout ce qu’il peut faire ou dire,
M£me ce qu’il ne dit pas.
In vain the lover tries to veil
The flame which in his bosom lies;
His cheek's confusion tells the tale,
We read it in his languid eyes.
And tho* his words the heart betray,
Hie silence speaks ev’n mere than they
ODE xxvm.
AS in the Lemnian caves of fire,
The mate of her who nurs'd desire,
Moulded the glowing steel, to form
Arrows for Cupid, thrilling warm;
And Venus eveiy barb imbues
With droppings of her honied dews;
While Love (alas! the victim-heart),
Tinges with gall the burning dart;
This ode is referred to by Le Mothe le Vayer, who, I beliere, was the
author of that curious little work, called “ Hexameron Rustique.” He
makes use of this, as well as the thirty-fifth, in his ingenious but indelicate
explanation of Homer’s Cave of the Nymphs. Journee Quatrieme.
While Lome (alas! the victim-heart),
Tinges with gall the hurtling dart.] Thus Claudian—
Labuntur gemini fontes, hic dulcis, amarus
Alter, et infusis corrumpit mella venenis,
Unde Cupidineas armavit fama sagittas.
Once, to this Lemnian cave of flame,
The crested Lord of battles came;
’Twas from the ranks of war he rush'd,
His spear with many a life-drop blush’d!
He saw the mystic darts, and smil'd
Derision on the archer-child.
In Cyprus’ isle two rippling fountains fall,
And one with honey flows, and one with gall;
In these, if we may take the tale from fame,
The son of Venus dips his darts of flame.
See the ninety-first emblem of Alciatus, on the close connection which
subsists between sweets and bitterness.
The allegorical description of Cupid’s employment, in Horace, may vie
with this in fancy, though not in delicacy—
ferus et Cupido
Semper ardentes acuens sagittas
Cote cruenti.
And Cupid, sharpening all his fiery darts,
Upon a whetstone stain’d with blood of hearts.
Secundus has borrowed this, but has somewhat softened the image by
the omission of the epithet “ cruentA.”
Fallor an ardentes acuebat cote sagittas ? Eleg. i.
“ And dost thou smile ? (said little Love),
“ Take this dart, and thou may’st prove,
“ That tho’ they pass the breeze’s flight,
“ My bolts are not so feathery-light.”
He took the shaft—and oh ! thy look
Sweet Venus I when the shaft he took—
He sigh’d—and felt the urchin’s art—
He sigh’d, in agony of heart,
“ It is not light—I die with pain—
“ Take—take thy arrow back again.”
“ No”—said the child—“ it must not be,
“ That little dart was made for thee!”
ODE XXLX.
YES—Gloving is a painful thrill,
And not to love more painful still;
But surely ’tis the worst of pain,
To love and not be lov'd again!
Affection now has fled from earth,
Nor fire of genius, light of birth,
Yes'—loving is a painful thrill\
And not to love more painful still; &c.~\ Monsieur Menfge, in the fol-
lowing Anacreontic, enforces the necessity of loving—
ϊϊψ t* iw ftXurai.
Προ? Πvrpw AamtiXa *Τ«ττop,
Μεγα $av(aa τηρ aotJiu*
XAfirwf $αλος *Τιττ£,
Φ*λΐω/MV U iTAipi.
Φιληχταν ο $ (TofifAi.
»
ΦιλιηβΊ σψνος ΑΡπς,
t
Το rntm τη Σωφρονκτχχ,
Σοφιψις πΑτηρ Απατης.
Nor heavenly virtue, can beguile
From beauty’s cheek one favoring smile.
Gold is the woman's only theme,
Gold is the woman’s only dream.
Oh! never be that wretch forgiven—
Forgive him not, indignant heaven!
Τ» j’ami γΐΜίτ *Eftnof ;
Axo»» [At* ir» ψυχής.*
Jfrtfvy$exrtp ii( OXtftrw
KMTOUUt/MMtf AMMfll.
Βρβώβκ nrvyiAtwtn
» BiXun» ιξαγιιρ*.
Πνρι	φβΜΜΐ
Τνπαρβηρβς χ*9αιρ*ι.
ΦιλΜ/Λΐ» m 'TRTTB,
ΦΐλΜ)/Μ» Μ fT«Hpf.
Alucttf & X«iJ*pwri
Ay»s< ip»?**
Koxor tu£«pw τ» jwew
'im /*n Jbratr «uifof
,-	Φ(λ((Μ*	τι mh fiXarStu.
* Thia line is borrowed from an epigram by Alpheus of Mitylene.
— . ψνχη; iri> Ep«f atxowi.
Menage, I think, says somewhere, that he was the first who produced this to the world.
Whose grovelling eyes could first adore,
Whose heart could pant for sordid ore.
Since that devoted thirst began,
Man has forgot to feel for man;
The pulse of social life is dead,
And all it’s fonder feelings fled!
TO PETER DANIEL HUETT.
Thou ! of tuneful bards the first,
Thou ! by all the graces nurst.
Friend! each other friend above,
Come with me, and learn to love.
Loving is a simple lore,
Graver men have learn’d before;
Nay—the boast of former ages,
Wisest of the wisest sages,
Sophroniscus’ prudent son,
Was by love’s illusion won—
Oh ! how heavy life would move,
If we knew not how to love!
Love’s a whetstone to the mind—
Thus ’tis pointed, thus refin’d.
When the soul dejected lies,
Love can waft it to the skies;
War too has sullied Nature’s charms,
For gold provokes the world to arms!
And oh 1 the worst of all it’s art,
I feel it breaks the lover’s heart!
When in languor sleeps the heart,
Love can wake it with his dart;
When the mind is dull and dark,
Love can light it with his spark i
Come, oh ! come then—let us haste
All the bliss of love to taste:
Let us love both night and day,
Let us love our lives away i
And when hearts, from loving free,
(If indeed such hearts there be),
Frown upon our gentle flame,
And the sweet delusion blame;
This shall be my only curse,
(Could I—could I wish them worse ?)
May they ne’er the rapture prove,
Of the smile from lips we love!
ODE XXX.
’TWAS in an aiiy dream of night,
I fancied, that I wing’d my flight
On pinions fleeter than the wind,
While little Love, whose feet were twin’d
(I know not why) with chains of lead,
Pursued me as I trembling fled;
Pursued—and could I e’er have thought?—
Swift as the moment I was caught!
What does the wanton Fancy mean
By such a strange, illusive scene ?
I fear she whispers to my breast,
That you, my girl, have stol’n my rest;
Barnes imagines from this allegory, that our poet married very late in
life. 1 do not perceive any thing in the ode, which seems to allude to ma-
trimony, except it be the lead upon the feet of Cupid; and I must confess
that I agree in the opinion of Madame Dacier, in her life of the poet, that
he was always too fond of pleasure to marry.
That though my fancy, for a while,
Has hung on many a woman's smile,
I soon dissolv'd the passing vow,
And ne’er was caught by love ’till now !
ODE XXXI.
ARM’D with hyacinthine rod,
(Arms enough for such a god)
Cupid bade me wing my pace,
And try with him the rapid race.
The design of this little fiction is to intimate, that much greater pain at-
tends insensibility than can ever result from the tendereft impressions of
love. Longepierre has quoted an ancient epigram (I do not know where
he found it), which has some similitude to this ode—
Lecto compositus, vix prima silentia noctis
Carpebam, et somno lumina victa dabam ;
Cum me ssevus Amor prensum, sursumque capillis
Excitat, et lacerum pervigilare jubet.
Tu famulus meus, inquit, ames cum mille puellas,
Solus Io, solus, dure jacere potes ?
Exilio et pedibus nudis, tunicaque soluta,
Omne iter impedio, nullum iter expedio.
Nunc propero, nunc ire piget; rursumque redire
Paenitet; et pudor est stare via media.
Ecce tacent voces hominum, strepitusque ferarum,
Et volucrum cantus, turbaque fida canum.
O’er the wild torrent, rude and deep,
By tangled brake and pendent steep,
"With weary foot I panting flew,
My brow was chill with drops of dew.
Solus ego ex cunctis paveo somnumque torumque,
Et sequor imperium, saeve Cupido, tuum.
Upon my couch I lay, at night profound,
My languid eyes in magic slumbers bound,
When Cupid came and snatch’d me from my bed,
And forc’d me many a weary way to tread—
" What! (said the god) shall you, whose vows are known,
“ Who love so many nymphs, thus sleep alone.”
I	rise and follow—all the night I stray,
Unshelter’d, trembling, doubtful of my way.
Tracing with naked foot the painful track,
Loth to proceed, yet fearful to go back.
Yes—at' that hour, when Nature seems interr’d,
When warbling birds, nor lowing flocks are heard ;
I—I alone—a fugitive from rest,
Passion my guide and madness in my breast,
Wander the world around, unknowing where,
The slave of love, the victim of despair 1
My brow was chili with drops of dew.] I have followed those who read
And now my soul exhausted, dying,
To my lip was faintly flying;
And now I thought the spark had fled,
When Cupid hover’d o'er my head,
And fanning light his breezy plume,
Recall’d me from my languid gloom—
rfipn- ISpui for τΓΐιρικ uJpoς—the former is partly authorized by the MS. which
reads irtipn ϋρας.
And now my soul\ exhausted, dying,
To my lip was faintly flying; &;.] In the original, he says, his heart
flew to his nose; but our manner more naturally transfers it to the lips.
Such is the effect that Plato tells us he felt from a kiss, in a distich*, quoted
by Aulus Gellius—
Την ψυχή» Ayxbuvx φιλw», ιτι χιιλιην trjfo»,
Ηλβι γχρ ιί τληρων ως iixCn<rofxtw.
Whene’er thy nectar’d kiss I sip,
And drink thy breath, in melting twine,
My soul then flutters to my lip,
Ready to fly and mix with thine.
And fanning light his breezy plume,
Recalled me from my languid gloom—]	“	The	facility	with	which	Cu-
Then said, in accents half-reproving,
44 Why hast thou been a foe to loving ?’*
pid recovers him, signifies that the sweets of love make us easily forget any
solicitudes which he may occasion.” La Fosse.
ODE XXXII.
STREW me a breathing bed of leaves,
Where Lotus with the myrtle weaves;
And while in luxury’s dream I sink,
Let me the balm of Bacdius drink 1
We here have the poet» in his true attributes, reclining upon myrtles,
with Cupid for his cup-bearer. Some interpreters have ruined the picture
by making Epwj the name of his slave. None but Love should fill the gob·
let of Anacreon. Sappho has assigned this office to Venus, in a fragment.
Ελβί, Κυτρι, χρνσιΐΛίβΊν u xvXtxtmv aCpoic «τνμριργ/ΜΐΌ» $«λΜΜ«ΐ ηχτ*ρ mm·
χοικτα Tirroi» τοις ireupo»f i/Mt; yt not ιτοις.
Which may be thus paraphrased—
Hither Venus ! queen of kisses,
This shall be the night of blisses!
This the night, to fnendship dear,
Thou sbalt be our Hebe here.
Fill the golden brimmer high—
Let it sparkle like thine eye!
Bid the rosy current gush—
Let it mantle like thy blush 1
In this delicious hour of joy,
Young Love shall be my goblet-boy ;
Folding his little golden vest,
With cinctures, round his snowy breast,
Himself shall hover by my side,
And minister the racy tide !
Swift as the wheels that kindling roll,
Our life is hurrying to the goal:
A scanty dust, to feed the wind, ;
Is all the trace ’twill leave behind.
Why do we shed the rose’s bloom
Upon the cold, insensate tomb ?
Can flowery breeze, or odour’s breath,
Affect the slumbering chill of death ?
Venus ! hast thou e’er above
Seen a feast so rich in love ?
Not a soul that is not mine !
Not a soul that is not thine!
“ Compare with this ode (says the German commentator) the beautiful
poem in Ramler’s Lyr. Blumenlese, lib. iv. p. 296. Amor als Diencr.”.
No—no—I ask no balm to steep
With fragrant tears my bed of sleep:
But now, while every pulse is glowing,
Now let me breathe the balsam flowing;
Now let the rose, with blush of fire,
Upon my brow it’s scent expire;
And bring the nymph with floating eye,
Oh ! she will teach me how to die!—
Yes—Cupid—ere my soul retire,
To join the blest elysian choir,
With wine, and love, and blisses dear,
I’ll make my own elysium here !
ODE XXXIII.
T WAS noon of night, when round the pole
The sullen bear is seen to roll;
And mortals, wearied with the day,
Are slumbering all their cares away.
An infant, at that dreary hour,
Came weeping to my silent bower,
And wak’d me with a piteous prayer,
To save him from the midnight air!
“ And who art thou,” I waking cry,
“ That bid’st my blissful visions fly ?”
Monsieur Bernard, the author of l’Art d’aimer, has written a ballet called
Les Surprises de Γ Amour,” in which the subject of the third entree is
Anacreon, and the story of this ode suggests one of the scenes. Oeuvres
de Bernard. Anac. scene 4th.
The German annotator refers us here to an imitation by Uz, lib. iii.—
*f Amor und sein Bruder,” and a poem of Kleist die Heilung. La Fontaine
has translated, or rather imitated this ode.
ζζ
“ O gentle sire 1” the infant said—
“ In pity take me to thy shed;
“ Nor fear deceit—a wretched child
“ I wander o’er the gloomy wild.
“ Chill drops the rain, and not a ray
“ Illumes the drear and misty way 1”
I heard the baby’s tale of woe—
I heard the bitter night-winds blow—
And sighing for his piteous fate,
I trimm’d my lamp and op’d the gate.
’Twas Love 1—the little wandering sprite,
His pinion sparkled through the night—
I knew him by his bow and dart—:
I knew him by my fluttering heart!
“ And who art thou” I waking cry,
“ That bid?st my blissful visions fly ?”] Anacreon appears to have been a
voluptuaiy even in dreaming, by the lively regret which he expresses at
being disturbed from his visionary enjoyments. See the odes x and xxxvii.
’Twas Love !—the little wandering sprite, 6?c.] See the beautiful de-
scription of Cupid, by Moschus, in his first idyll.
I take him in, and fondly raise
The dying ember’s cheering blaze;
Press from his dank and clinging hair
The chrystals of the freezing air,
And in my hand and bosom hold
His little fingers thrilling cold.
And now the ember’s genial ray
Had warm’d his anxious fears away;
44 I pray thee,” said the wanton child,
(My bosom trembled as he smil’d)
44 I pray thee let me try my bow,
44 For through the rain I’ve wander’d so,
44 That much I fear, the ceaseless shower
44 Has injur'd it’s elastic power.”
The fatal bow the urchin drew,
Swift from the string the arrow flew;
It flew as swift as glancing flame,
And to my very soul it came 1
44 Fare thee well,” I heard him say,
As laughing wild he wing’d away—
“ Fare thee well, for now I know,
“ The rain has not relax’d my bow;
“ It still can send a madd’ning dart,
“ As thou shalt own with all thy heart 1”
ODE XXXIV.
OH thou, of all creation blest,
Sweet insect! that delight’st to rest
Upon the wild-wood’s leafy tops,
To drink the dew that morning drops,
Father Rapin, in a Latin ode addressed to the grasshopper, has pre-
served some of the thoughts of our author—
O quae virenti graminis in toro,
Cicada, blande sidis, et herbidos
Saltus oberras, otiosos
Ingeniosa ciere cantus.
Seu forte adultis floribus incubas,
Coeli caducis ebria fletibus, &c.
Oh ! tbou, that on the grassy bed
Which Nature’s vernal hand has spread,
Reclinest soft, and tun’st thy song,
The dewy herbs and leaves among !
Whether thou ly’st on springing flowers,
Drunk with the balmy morning-showers,
Or,---------------------
See wbat Licetus says about grasshoppers, cap. 93 and 185.
And chirp thy song with such a glee,
That happiest kings may envy thee !
Whatever decks the velvet field,
*
Whate’er the passing seasons yield;
I
Whatever buds—whatever blows—
For thee it buds—for thee it grows.
Nor yet art thou the peasant’s fear,
To him thy friendly notes are dear;
For thou art mild as matin dews,
And ever, when the summer hues
Begin to paint the bloomy plain,
We hear thy sweet, prophetic strain;
Thy sweet, prophetic strain we hear,
And bless the notes and thee revere 1
And chirp thy song with such a glee, “ Some authors have affirmed
(says Madame Dacier), that it is only male grasshoppers which sing, and
that the females are silent; and on this circumstance is founded a bon-mot
of XenarchllS, the comic poet, who says UT eirw ot ηττιγις mi iuJaip.ov£f, uv
ruii γυναιζι* xS' ότ· xv fum m ; “ are not the grasshoppers happy in having
dumb wives ?” This note is originally Henry Stephen’s; but I chose rather
to make Madame Dacier my authority for it.
The Muses love thy shrilly tone;
Apollo calls thee all his own;
’Twas he who gave that voice to thee,
’Tis he who tunes thy minstrelsy.
Unworn by age’s dim decline,
The fadeless blooms of youth are thine.
Melodious insect! child of earth !
In wisdom mirthful, wise in mirth;
%
The Muses love thy shrilly tone;	Phile de Animal, proprietat. calls
this insect Mjwoh? φ·λος, the darling of the Muses, and Msruv opt», the bird of
the Muses—and we find Plato compared for his eloquence to the grasshop-
per, in the following punning lines of Timon, preserved by Diogenes Laer-
tius—
TW πάντων JSiyiiTo πλατύτατος, χλλ’ χγορηπις
HJutxtic τιττιζιν ιτογρχφος, ό»θ txxfnfAH
Atviptx εφιζομινα *πχ λιιριοεσιτχν »ικπ.
This last line is borrowed from Homer’s Iliad, y. where there occurs the
very same simile.
Melodious insect I child of earth /] Longepierre has quoted the two first
lines of an epigram of Antipater, from the first book of the Anthologia,
where he prefers the grasshopper to the swan—
Exempt from every weak decay,
That withers vulgar frames away;
With not a drop of blood to stain
The current of thy purer vein;
So blest an age is pass’d by thee,
Thou seem’st—a little deity 1
Apxii r£TTty«f	ίρονος,	αλλα	xiorrtf
AhSuv χυχνω» un ytywortpoi.
In dew, that drops from rooming's wmgs^
The gay Cicada sipping floats;
A»d drunk with dew bis matin sings
Sweeter than any cygnet's notes.
ODE XXXV.
CUPID once, upon a bed
Of roses, laid his weary head;
Luckless urchin, not to see
Within the leaves a slumbering bee—
Theocritus has imitated this beautiful ode in his nineteenth idyll, but is
very inferior, I think, to his original, in delicacy of point, and ηβϊνβίέ of
expression. Spenser, in one of his smaller compositions, has sported more
diffusely on the same subject. The poem, to. which I allude, begins thus—
Upon a day as Love lay sweetly slumbering,
All in his mother’s lap;
A gentle bee, with his loud trumpet murmuring,
About him flew by hap, &c. 6cc.
In Almeloveen’s collection of’epigrams, there is one by Luxorius, cor-
respondent somewhat with the turn of Anacreon, where Love complains to
his mother of being wounded by a rose.
The ode before us is the very flower of simplicity. The infantine com-
plainings of the little god, and the natural and impressive reflection which
they draw from Venus, are beauties of inimitable grace. I hope I shall be
The bee awak’d—with anger wild
The bee awak’d and stung the child.
Loud and'piteous are his cries,
To Venus quick he runs—he flies—
pardoned for introducing another Greek Anacreontic of Monsieur Menage,
not for it’s similitude to the subject of this ode, but for some faint traces of
this natural simplicity, which it appears to me to have preserved—
Ερως ποτ tv χορίίαις
Των flropOfvw άωτο*
Tip ροι φιλυ* Kopim*»
*Ως tiitv, ως προς αυηι*
Hponfp&iAt9 τραχρλω
Δίδυμος rt χαράς arrrm
Φιλί* [At, f*rmp, Miri.
ΚλΧε/atm Κόριννα,
Mnrtip, $ρυ$ριαζα,
*ί!ς ποφθοίος pt* βοό*
K!Λυτός it ίυσχιραινων,
'fl( o/Aftarl· 7τλαντ)βέκ,
i/>u8/>ia£ii.
EyOI it 0i ITApAfAty
Μn iv<r%spawi, φημι·
Κυπριν η και Κόρινναν
Διαγνωναι me
Και οι βλίττοιτης οξυ.
Φ
“ Oh mother I—I am wounded through—
“ I die with pain—in sooth I do!
“ Stung by some little angry thing,
“ Som'e serpent on a tiny wing—
As dancing o'er th’ enamell’d plain,
The flowret of the virgin train,
My soul’s Corinna lightly play’d,
Young Cupid saw the graceful maid ;
He saw—and in a moment flew,
And round her neck his arms he threw;
And said, with smiles of infant joy,
“ Oh ! kiss me, mother, kiss thy boy !”
Unconscious of a mother's name,
The modest virgin blush’d with shame!
And angry Cupid, scarce believing
That vision could be so deceiving,
Thus to mistake his Cyprian dame,
The little infant blush’d with shame.
“ Be not asham’d, my boy,”—I cried,
For I was lingering by his side—
Corinna and thy lovely mother,
Believe me are so like each other,
That clearest eyes are oft betray’d,
And take thy Venus for the maid.
Zito, in his Cappriciosi Pensieri, has translated this ode of Anacreon.
“ A bee it was—for once, I know
“ I heard a rustic cali it so.”
Thus he spoke, and she the while
Heard him with a soothing smile.
Then said, “ My infant, if so much
“ Thou feel the little wild-bee’s touch,
“ How must the heart, ah Cupid! be,
“ The hapless heart that’s stung by thee 1”
ODE XXXVI.
IF hoarded gold possess’d a power
To lengthen life’s too fleeting hour,
And purchase from the hand of death
A little span, a moment’s breath,
How I would love the precious ore I
And every day should swell my store.
That when the Fates would send their minion,
To waft me off on murky pinion,
Monsieur Fontenelle has translated this ode, in his dialogue between
Anacreon and Aristotle m the shades, where he bestows the prize of wis-
dom upon the poet.
“ The German imitators of it arc, Lessing, in his poem “ Gestern Brii-
der, &c.” Gleim, in the ode “ An den Tod,” and Schmidt in der Pbet,
Blumenl. Getting. p# 7 ^ Degen.
That wJuti the Fates would send their minion,
To waft me off ο» murky pinion, 6fc.] The commentators, who are so fond
of disputing c< de land caprini,” have been ve»y busy on the authority of
the phrase !» av ixmv ιπιλθτι. The reading of lv dv θανατος tvtxiti, which Dc
I might some hours of life obtain,
And bribe him back to hell again.
But, since, we ne’er can charm away
The mandate of that awful day,
Why do we vainly weep at fate,
And sigh for life’s uncertain date ?
The light of gold can ne’er illume
The dreary midnight of the tomb I
And why should I then pant for. treasures ?
Mine be the brilliant round of pleasures;
The goblet rich, the board of friends,
Whose flowing souls the goblet blends!
Medenbach proposes in his Amsenitates Litterariae, was already hinted by
Le Fevre, who seldom suggests any thing worth notice.
The goblet rich, the board of friends.
Whose flowing souls the goblet blends /] This communion of friendship,
which sweetened the bowl of Anacreon, has not been forgotten by the au-
thor of the following scolium, where the blessings of life are enumerated
with proverbial simplicity. ‘Tyiamw μιν αξirov avip 3w«. Διυτιρον it, καλόν
ipvtiv ytvitrflM, το τρίτοι» it, irXmttv α,ίολως. Και το τιταρτον, ffvwiCa» μη» tuv
Mine be the nymph, whose form reposes
Seductive on that bed of roses;
And oh 1 be mine the soul’s excess,
Expiring in her warm caress 1
Of mortal blessings here, the first is health,
And next, those charms by which the eye we move;
The third is wealth, unwounding guiltless wealth,
And then, an intercourse with those we love 1
ODE XXXVII.
TWAS night, and many a circling bowl
Had deeply warm’d my swimming soul;
As lull’d in slumber I was laid,
Bright visions o’er my fancy play’d!
“ Compare with this ode the beautiful poem “ der Traum” of Uz.”
Degen.
Monsieur Le Fevre, in a note upon this ode, enters into an elaborate
and learned justification of drunkenness ; and this is probably the cause of
the severe reprehension, which I believe he suffered for his Anacreon.
“ Fuit olim fateor (says he in a note upon Longinus), cum Sapphonem
amabam. Sed ex quo ilia me perditissima faemina paene miserum perdidit
cum sceleratissimo suo congerrone (Anacreontem dico, si nescis Lector),
noli sperare, &c. &c.” He adduces on this ode the authority of Plato, who
allowed ebriety, at the Dionysian festivals, to men arrived at their fortieth
year. He likewise quotes the following line from Alexis, which he says no
one, who is not totally ignorant of the world, can hesitate to confess the
truth of—
OuJit; φιλοπ»τΐ)( in* α»$ρ«ιτο{ χχχος.
" No lover of drinking was ever a vicious man.”
With virgins, blooming as the dawn,
I seem’d to trace the opening lawn;
Light, on tiptoe bath’d in dew,
We flew, and sported as we flew !
Some ruddy striplings, young and sleek,
With blush of Bacchus on their cheek,
Saw me trip the flowery wild
With dimpled girls, and slyly smil’d;
*
Smil’d indeed with wanton glee,
But ah! ’twas plain they envied me.
And still I flew—and now I caught
The panting nymphs, and fondly thought
To kiss—-when all my dream of joys,
Dimpled girls and ruddy boys,
—when all my dream of joys,
Dimpled girls and ruddy boys,
All were gone !—] “ Nonnus says of Bacchus, almost in the same words
that Anacrcon uses—
■ Εγρομινος ft
Παρΰίνΰν wc’ Εχιχη<Γ£, και nSiXtv αυθι; ιαυην.”
All were gone!—“ Alas!” I said—
Sighing for th* illusions fled—
“ Sleep 1—again my joys restore,
“ Oh! let me dream them o'er and o’er Γ'
Waking, be foefc the phantom’s charms,
He found no beauty in his arms;
Again to slumber he essay’d,
Again to clasp the shadowy mud! Longepterre.
“ Sleep!—again my joys restore,
** Oh 1 let me dream them o'er and o’erf'^ Doctor Johnson, in his pre-
face to Shakespeare, animadverting upon the commentators of that poet,
who pretended, in every little coincidence of thought, to detect an imita-
tion of some ancient poet, alludes in the following words to the line of
Anacreon before us. “ I have been told that when Caliban, after a pleas-
ing dream, says, “ I cried to sleep again,” the author imitates Anacreon,
who had, like any other man, the same wish on the same occasion.”
ODE XXXVIII.
Let us drain the nectar’d bowl,
Let us raise the song of soul
To him, the God who loves so well
The nectar’d bowl, the choral swell!
Him, who instructs the sons of earth
To thrid the tangled dance of mirth;
Him, who was nurs’d with infant love,
And cradled in the Paphian grove;
Him, that the snowy Queen of Charms
Has fondled in her twining arms,
u Compare with this beautiful ode the- verses of Hagedorn, lib. v. das
Geseilschaftliche ; and of Burger, pag. 51. &c. &c.’r Oegen.
Him, that the snowy Queen of Charms,
Has fondled in her twining arms.~\ Robertellus, upon the epithalamium
of Catullus, mentions an ingenious derivation of Cytheraea, the name of
- Venus, itetf» tv χιυθκ» ts( ιρωτχς, which seems to hint that
-----Love’s fairy favours
Are lost, when not concealed.
From him that dream of transport flows,
Which sweet intoxication knows;
With him, the brow forgets to darkle,
And brilliant graces learn to sparkle.
Behold!—my boys a goblet bear,
Whose sunny foam bedews the air,
Where are now the tear, the sigh ?
To the winds they fly—they fly !
Grasp the bowl—in nectar sinking,
Man of sorrow, drown thy thinking !
Oh ! can the tears we lend to thought
In life’s account avail us aught ?
Can we discern, with all our lore,
The path we’re yet to journey o’er ?
No—no—the walk of life is dark,
’Tis wine alone can strike a spark!
No—no—the walk of life is dark,
’Tis wine alone can strike a spark /] The brevity of life allows arguments
for the voluptuary as well as the moralist. Among many parallel passages
which Longepierre has adduced, I shall content myself with this epigram
from the Anthologia.
Then let me quaff the foamy tide,
And through the dance meandering glide
Let me imbibe the spicy breath
Of odours, chaf’d to fragrant death;
Or from the kiss of love inhale
A more voluptuous, richer gale!
As<rajuii/o»j Π^ο&κ^ ττυχασωμ^α, χαι τον αχρατον
Ελκω/Αίν, χνλιχας μηζονας αρα[Α$νοι.
Ταιος ο χαιροντων $ςι βιος. tna τα λοιτα
Γήρας χωλκτιι, χα$ το τιλος ^ανατος*
I
Of which the following is a loose paraphrase—
Fly, my belov’d, to yonder stream,
We’ll plunge us from the noontide beam ;
Then cull the rose’s humid bud,
And dip it in our goblet’s flood.
Our age of bliss, my nymph, shall fly,
As sweet, tho* passing as that sigh,
Which seems to whisper o’er your lip,
“ Come—while you may—of rapture sip.”
For age will steal the rosy form,
And chill the pulse, which trembles warm !
And death ! alas—that hearts, which thrill
*
Like your’s and mine should e’er be still!
To souls, that court the phantom Care,
Let him retire and shroud him there;
While we exhaust the nectar’d bowl,
And swell the choral song of soul
To him, the God who loves so well
The nectar’d bowl, the choral swell!
ODE XXXIX.
How i love the festive boy,
Tripping wild the dance of joy!
How I love the mellow sage,
Smiling through the veil of age !
And whene’er this man of years
In the dance of joy appears,
Age is on his temples hung,
But his heart—his heart is young!
Age is on his temples hung,
But his heart—his heart is young /] Saint Pavin makes the same distinc<
tion in a sonnet to a young girl—
Je sais bien que les destin6es,
Ont mal compassle nos anr^es,
Ne regardez que mon amour.
Pcut-etre en serez vous emue,
II	est jeune et n’est que du jour,
Belle Iris, que je vous ai vu.
Fair and young, thou bloomest now,
And I full many a year have told ;
But read the heart and not the brow,
Thou shalt not find my love is old.
My love’s a child ; and thou can’st say
How much his little age may be,
For he was born the very day
That first I set my eyes on thee !
ODE XL.
/ s
I KNOW that Heaven ordains me here,
To run this mortal life’s career;
Φ
The scenes, which I have joumied o’er,
Return no more—alas I no more;
And all the path I’ve yet to go,
I neither know, nor ask to know.
Then surely, Care, thou can’st not twine
Thy fetters round a soul like mine;
No—no—the heart that feels with me,
Can never be a slave to thee!
No—no—the heart that feels with me,
Can never be a slave to thee /] Longepierre quotes an epigram here from
the Anthologia, on account of the similarity of a particular phrase—it is
by no means anacreontic, but the interesting simplicity of it induced me
to paraphrase it, and may atone for its intrusion—
Ελτπί κα» <ru τυχψι jutyoe χχιριτι. rw λιμιν’ tvpor.
Ovitv t/Aoi	ποαζιτι	τας	/ait' ijwi.
And oh! before the vital thrill,
Which trembles at my heart, is still,
I'll gather Joy’s luxuriant flowers,
And gild with bliss my fading hours;
Bacchus shall bid my winter bloom,
And Venus dance me to the tomb!
At length to Fortune, and to you
Delusive Hope ! a last adieu—
The charm that once beguil’d is o’er,
And I have reach’d my deftin’d shore !
Away—away—your flattering arts,
May now betray some simpler hearts,
And you will smile at their believing,
And they shall weep at your deceiving !
Bacchus shall hid my winter bloom,
jind Venus dance me to the tomb /] The same commentator has quoted
an epitaph, written upon our poet by Julian, where he makes him give the
precepts of good-fellowship even from the tomb—
Πολλαχι fAiv toS' autra, χαι ιχ τιγ*£κ St |3oi)<rw.
Πικτε, τριμ ταντη»	xewp.
ν'
This lesson oft in life I sung,
And from my grave I still shall cry,
u Drink—mortal! drink—while time is young,
“ Ere death has made thee cold as I.”
ODE XLI.
When Spring begems the dewy scene,
How sweet to walk the velvet green,
And hear the Zephyr’s languid sighs,·
As o’er the scented mead he flies!
How sweet to mark the pouting vine,
Ready to fall in tears of wine;
And with the maid, whose every sigh
Is love and bliss, entranc’d to lie
Where the imbowering branches meet—
Oh! is not this divinely sweet ?
And with the maid, whose every sigh
Js love and bliss, £&:.] Thus Horace—·
Quid habes illius, illius
Quae spirabat amores,
Quae me suspuerat mihi. Book iv. Ode 13.
And does there then remain but this,
And. hast thou lost each rosy ray
Of her, who breath'd the soul of jjliss,
And stole me from myself away !
ODE XLU.
YES—be the glorious revel mine,
Where humour sparkles from the wine!
Around· me, let the youthful choir
Respond to my beguiling lyre ;
And while the red cup circles round,
Mingle in soul as well as sound !
Let the bright nymph, with trembling eye,
Beside me all in blushes lye;
And, while she weaves a frontlet fair
Of hyacinth to deck my hair,
The character of Anacreon is here very strikingly depicted. His love of
social, harmonized pleasures, is expressed with a warmth, amiable and en-
dearing. Among the epigrams imputed to Anacreon is the following—it
is the only one worth translation, and it breathes the same sentiments with
this ode—
Ou ptXof, o; xpnmpi trap» πλιω οιχοποταζ»»,
Ν«κ*α και xoXfjuov Saxpuowra Xtyti.
Αλλ* «γκ Mmrifcw τι, και αγλαα Sup Άφροίπηζ
Συρμια-γων, ιρχτης /wnrxtrat ηφροβνηκ·
Oh 1 let me snatch her side-long kisses,
And that shall be my bliss of blisses !
My soul, to festive feeling true,
One pang of envy never knew ;
And little has it learn’d to dread
The gall, that envy’s tongue can shed.
Away—I hate the slanderous dart,
Which steals to wound th’ unwary heart;
And oh ! I hate, with all my soul,
Discordant clamors o’er the bowl,
Where every cordial heart should be
Attun’d to peace and harmony.
When to the lip the brimming cup is prest,
And hearts are all a-float upon the stream;
Then banish from my board th* unpolish’d guest,
Who makes the feats of war his barbarous theme.
But bring the man, who o’er his goblet wreathes
The Muse’s laurel with the Cyprian flower;
Oh ! give me him, whose heart expansive breathes
All the refinements of the social hour.
Come—let us hear the soul of song
Expire the silver harp along;
And through the dance’s ringlet move,
With maidens mellowing into love—
Thus simply happy—thus at peace—
Sure such a life should never cease !
ODE XLIII.
WHILE our rosy fillets shed
Blushes o’er each fervid head,
With many a cup and many a smile
The festal moments we beguile.
And while the harp, impassion’d, flings
Tuneful rapture from the strings,
And while the harp, impassion'd, flings
Tuneful rapture from the strings, £sfc.] I had collected an host of au-
thorities upon the barbiton, but found that after all, they left me ignorant
of the nature of the instrument. There is scarcely any point upon which
we are so totally uninformed as the music of the ancients. The authors,*
extant upon the subject, are, I imagine, little understood; but certainly if
one of their moods was a progression by quarter-tones, which we are told
was the nature of the enharmonic scale, simplicity was by no means the
characteristic of their melody; for this is a nicety of progression, of which
modern music is not susceptible.
The invention of the barbiton is, by Athenaeus, attributed to Anacreon.
See his fourth book, where it is called to iupupa τη A»«xptovrof. Neanthes of
* Collected by Meibomius.
Some airy nymph, with fluent limbs,
Through the dance luxuriant swims,
Waving, in her snowy hand,
The leafy Bacchanalian wand,
Which, as the tripping wanton flies,
Shakes it’s tresses to her sighs !
A youth the while, with loosen’d hair
Floating on the listless air,
Sings, to the wild-harp’s tender tone,
A tale of woes, alas I his own—
And then, what nectar in his sigh,
As o’er his lip the murmurs die 1
Cyzicus, as quoted by Gyraldus, asserts the same. Vide Chabot. in Horat.
on the words " Lesboum barbiton,” in the first ode.
And then, what nectar in his sight
As o'er his lip the murmurs die f\ Longepierre has quoted here an epi-
gram from the Anthologia—-
Kxpv rtf ft,' ιφιλκη wtitfirtpa χιιΛ/τι» vypuf.
Νίχταρ ιην το φίλη/χα. το γχρ {-ο/λχ μχταρος *τ»«.
Νυν μάνα το φιλη/nwt, τβλυκ το» tptrrx wrruxuf.
Surely never yet has been
So divine—so blest a scene !
Has Cupid left the starry sphere,
To wave his golden tresses here ?	.	.
Oh yes t—and Venus, queen of wiles,
And Bacchus, shedding rosy smiles,
Of which the following may give some idea—
The kiss that she left on my lip,
Like a dew-drop shall lingering lie;
Twas nectar she gave me to sip,
’Twas nectar I drank in her sigh !
The dew that distill’d in that kiss,
To my soul was voluptuous wine ;
Ever since it is drunk with the bliss,
And feels a delirium divine !
Has Cupid left the starry sphere,
To wave his golden tresses here ?] The introduction of these deities to
the festival is merely allegorical. Madame Dacier thinks that the poet de-
scribes a masquerade, where these deities were personated by the company
in masks. The translation will conform with either idea.
All—all are here, to hail with me,
The genius of festivity!
All—all are here, to hail with me,
The genius of festivity I] Kw/χο;, the deity or genius of mirth. Philo-
stratus, in the third of his pictures (as all the annotators have observed),
gives a very beautiful description of this God.
ODE XLIV.
BUDS of roses, virgin flowers,
Cull’d from Cupid’s balmy bowers,
In the bowl of Bacchus steep,
’Till with crimson drops they weep I
Twine the rose—the garland twine,
Every leaf distilling wine;
Drink, and smile, and learn to think
That we were bom to smile and drink.
Rose ! thou art the sweetest flower,
That ever drank the amber shower;
This spirited poem is an eulogy on the rose; and again, in the fifty-
fifth ode, we shall find our author rich in the praises of that flower. In a
fragment of Sappho, in the romance of Achilles Tatius, to which Barnes
refers us, the rose is very elegantly stiled “ the eye of flowers and the
same poetess, in another fragment, calls the favours of the Muse “ The
roses of Pieria.” See the notes on the fifty-fifth ode.
“ Compare with this forty*fourth ode (says the German annotator) the
beautiful ode of Uz die Rose.”
Rose ! thou art the fondest child
Of dimpled spring, the wood-nymph wild 1
Even the Gods, who walk the sky,
Are amorous of thy scented sigh—
Cupid too, in Paphian shades,
His hair with rosy fillet braids,
When with the blushing, naked graces,
The wanton winding dance he traces.
Then bring me, showers of roses bring,
And shed them round me while I sing,
Great Bacchus 1—-in thy hallow’d shade,
With some celestial glowing maid,
When with the blushing, naked graces,
The wanton winding dance he traces7\	“	This	sweet	idea	of	Love	danc-
ing with the Graces, is almoii peculiar to Anacreon/’ Degen.
Wtth some celestialy glowing maid,	The epithet ββθυχολχoc, which
he gives to the nymph, is literally “ full-bosomed,” if this was really
Anacreon’s taste, the heaven of Mahomet would suit him in every parti-
cular. See the Koran, cap. 72.
While gales of roses round me rise,
In perfume, sweeten’d by her sighs,
I’ll bill and twine in airy dance,
Commingling soul with every glance 1
ODE XLV.
WlTHIN this goblet, rich and deep,
I cradle all my woes to sleep.
Why should we breathe the sigh of fear,
Or pour the unavailing tear ?
For death will never heed the sigh,
Nor soften at the tearful eye;
And eyes that sparkle, eyes that weep,
Must all alike be seal’d in sleep 1
Then let us never vainly stray,
In search of thorns, from pleasure’s way;
Then let us never vainly stray,
In search of thorns, from pleasure's way; &c.~\ I have thus endeavoured
to convey the meaning of n it τ» β«ο» *λ«Μαρ«ι; according to Regnier’s
paraphrase of the line—
E che val, fuor della strada
Del piacere alma e gmdita,
Vaneggiare in questa vita ?
Oh I let us quaff the rosy wave,
Which Bacchus loves, which Bacchus gave;
And in the goblet, rich and deep,
Cradle our crying woes to sleep I
ODE XLVI.
SEE—the young, the rosy Spring,
Gives to the breeze her spangled wing;
While virgin graces, warm with May,
Fling roses o’er her dewy way!
The fastidious affectation of some commentators has denounced this ode
as spurious. Degen pronounces the four last lines to be the patch-work of
some miserable versificator, and Brunck condemns the whole ode. It ap-
pears to me to be elegantly graphical; full of delicate expressions and luxu-
riant imagery. The abruptness of Ί& ve* tapo« φ»Μ»τβς is striking and spi-
rited, and has been imitated rather languidly by Horace—
Vides ut alta stet nive candidum
Soracte ■—
The imperative ιλ is infinitely more impressive, as in Shakespeare—
But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill
There is a simple and poetical description of Spring, in Catullus’s beau-
tiful farewel to Bithynia. Carm. 44.
Barnes conjectures, in his life of our poet, that this ode was written after
he had returned from Athens, to settle in his paternal seat at Teos; there
The murmuring billows of the deep
Have languish’d into silent sleep;
And mark ! the flitting sea-birds lave
Their plumes in the reflecting wave;
in a little villa at some distance from the city, which commanded a view of
the .Aegean Sea and the islands, he contemplated the beauties of nature and
enjoyed the felicities of retirement. Vide Barnes, in Anac. vita, $. xxxv.
This supposition, however unauthenticated, forms a pleasant association,
which makes the poem more interesting.
Monsieur Chevreau says, that Gregory Nazianzenus has paraphrased
somewhere this description of Spring—I cannot find it. See Chevreau
CEuvres Melees.
“ Compare with this ode (says Degen), the verses of Hagedorn, book
fourth der Frlihling, and book fifth der Mai.”
While virgin graces, warm with May,
Fling roses o'er her dewy way /] De Pauw reads, Χαφιτβ; fot» ftpusrir—
“ the roses display their graces.” This is not uningenious; but we lose by
it the beauty of the personification, to the boldness of which Regnier has
objected, very frivolously.
The murmuring billows of the deep
Have languish'd into silent sleep;	It	has	been	justly remarked, that
the liquid flow of the line **·αλυ»ιτ*» yoAnwi is perfectly expressive of the
tranquillity which it describes.
While cranes from hoary winter fly
To flutter in a kinder sky.
Now the genial star of day
Dissolves the murky clouds away ;
And cultur’d field, and winding stream
Are sweetly tissued by his beam.
Now the earth prolific swells
With leafy buds, and flowery bells;
Gemming shoots the olive twine,
Clusters ripe festoon the vine;
All along the branches creeping,
Through the velvet foliage peeping,
Little infant fruits we see
Nursing into luxury!
And -cultur'd field ondwxmdmg stream, 6fc.]	%	ft·*·»	iff* u tbe works
of men” (says Baxter), he means cities, temples and towns, which are then
illuminated by the beams of the sun.’*
ODE XLVIL
TlS true, my fading years decline,
Yet can I quaff the hnxmming wine,
As deep as any stripling fair,
Whose cheefcs the flush of morning wear;
And if, amidst the wanton crew,
I’m call’d to wind the dance’s due,
Thou shalt behold this vigorous hand,
Not faltering on the Bacchant’s wand,
But brandishing a rosy flask,
The only thyrsus e’er I’ll ask!
But brandishing a rosy flask,	Ασκοί was a kind of leathern vessel
for wine, very much in use, as should seem by the proverb ασκοί κ«» θύλακο;,
which was applied to those who were intemperate in eating and drinking.
This proverb is mentioned in some verses quoted by Athenaeus, from the
Hesione of Alexis.
The only thyrsus e'er ΓΙΙ ask /] Phornutus assigns as a reason for the
consecration of the thyrsus to Bacchus, that inebriety often renders the
support of a stick very necessary.
Let those, who pant for glory’s charms,
Embrace her in the field of arms;
While my inglorious, placid soul
Breathes not a wish beyond the bowL
Then fill it high, my ruddy slave,
And bathe me in it’s honied wave!
For though my fading years decay,
And though my bloom has pass’d away,
Like old Silenus, sire divine,
With blushes borrow’d from my wine,
I’ll wanton ’mid the dancing train,
And live my follies all again 1
ODE XLVIII.
WHEN my thirsty soul I steep,
Every sorrow’s lull’d to sleep.
Talk of monarchs! I am then
Richest, happiest, first of men,
Careless o’er my cup I sing,
Fancy makes me more than king;
Gives me wealthy Croesus’ store,
Can I, can I wish for more ?
On my velvet couch reclining,
Ivy leaves my brow entwining,
While my soul dilates with glee,
What are kings and crowns to me ?
Ivy leaves my hrow entwining, isfc.] “ The ivy was consecrated to Bac-
chus (says Montfauqon), because he formerly lay hid under that tree, or as
others will have it, because it’s leaves resemble those of the vine.” Other
reasons for it’s consecration, and the use of it in garlands at banquets, may
be found in Longepierre, Barnes, &c. &c.
If before my feet they lay,
1 would spurn them all away I
Arm you—arm you, man of might,
Hasten to the sanguine fight;
Let me—oh my budding vine I
Spill no other blood than thine.
Yonder brimming goblet see,
That alone shall vanquish me.
Warrior 1 shall I tell you true,
How we differ, I and you!
You’ll be dead—a senseless trank—
I shall only be—dead-drunk!
Arm you—arm you, man of might I
Hasten to the sanguine fight;] I have adopted the interpretation of Reg-
nier and others—
Altri segua Marte fero;
Che sol Bacco & Ί mio conforto.
ODE XLIX.
WHEN Bacchus, Jove’s immortal boy,
The rosy harbinger of joy,
Who, with the sunshine of the bowl,
Thaws the winter of our soul;
When to my inmost soul he glides,
And bathes it with his ruby tides,
This and the preceding ode, and a few more of the same character, are
merely chansons k boire. Most likely they were the effusions of the mo-
ment of conviviality, and were possibly , sung with rapture in Greece; but
that interesting association, by which they always recalled the convivial
emotions which had given birth to them, can be very little felt by the most
enthusiastic reader; and much less by a phlegmatic grammarian, who sees
nothing in them but dialects and particles.
Who, with the sunshine of the bowl,
Thaws the winter of our soul; £s?c.] Aucuoj is the title which he gives to
Bacchus in the original. It is a curious circumstance, that Plutarch mis-
took the name of Levi among the Jews for Atw (one of the bacchanal cries)
and accordingly supposed that they worshipped Bacchus.
A flow of joy, a lively heat
Fires my brain, and wings my feet!
’Tis surely something sweet, I think,
Nay, something heavenly sweet, to drink!
Sing—sing of love—let music’s breath
Softly beguile our rapturous death,
While, my young Venus, thou and I
To the voluptuous cadence die !
Then waking from our languid trance,
Again we’ll sport, again we’ll dance.
ODE L.
WHEN I drink—I feel, I feel
Visions of poetic zeal!
Warm with the goblet’s fresh’ning dews,
My heart invokes the heavenly Muse.
Faber thinks this spurious ; but, I believe, he is singular in his opinion.
It has all the spirit of our author. Like the wreath which he presented in
the dream—" it smells of Anacreon."
The form of this ode, in the original, is remarkable. It is a kind of song
of seven quatrain stanzas, each beginning with the line—
*Οτ ίγω πιω top omw.
The first stanza alone is incomplete, consisting but of three lines.
“ Compare with this poem (says Degen), the verses of Hagedorn, lib. ▼.
der Wein, where that divine poet has wantoned in the praises of wine."
When I drink—I feel—I feel
Visions of poetic zealf] “ Anacreon is not the only one (says Longepierre),
whom wine has inspired with poetry. There is an epigram in the first book
of the Anthologia, which begins thus—
Oiw; το· χαριιΐίτι jt*tyaf irAfi Imre; ooi£«,
TJiup St inmVf καλόν * tixok «roi.”
When 1 drink, my sorrow’s o’er—
I think of doubts and'fears no more;
But scatter to the railing wind
Each gloomy phantom of the mind I
When I drink, the jesting boy
Bacchus himself partakes my joy ;
And while we dance thro’ breathing bowers,
Whose every gale is rich with flowers,
If with water you fill up your glasses,
You’ll never write any thing wise;
For wine is the horse of Parnassus,
Which hurries a bard to the. skies!
And while we dance thro* breathing bowers,	If some of the transla-
tors had observed Doctor Trapp's caution» with regard to χολυανθια-ι» p’ ο
«vpeuf, “ Cave ne ccelum intelligas," they would not have spoiled the sim-
plicity of Anacreon’s fancy, by such extravagant conceptions of the passage.
Could our poet imagine such bombast as the following i—
Quand je bois, mon ceil s’imagine
Que, dans un tourbillon plein de parfums divers,
Bacchus m’ importe dans les airs,
Rempli de sa liqueur divine.
In bowls he makes my senses swim,
’Till the gale breathes of nought but him !
When I drink, I deftly twine
Flowers, begem’d with tears of wine;
And, while with festive hand I spread
The smiling garland round my head,
Something whispers in my breast,
How sweet it is to live at rest!
When I drink, and perfume stills
Around me all in balmy rills,
Then as some beauty, smiling roses,
In languor on my breast reposes,
Venus! I breathe my vows to thee,
In many a sigh of luxury !
When I drink, my heart refines,
And rises as the cup declines;
Or this—
Indi mi mena
Mentre lieto ebro deliro,
Bacco in giro
Per la vaga aura serena.
Rises in the genial flow,
That none but social spirits know,
When youthful revellers, round the bowl,
Dilating, mingle soul with soul!
When I drink, the bliss is mine—
There’s bliss in every drop of wine!
All other joys that I have known,
. I’ve scarcely dar’d to call my own;
But this the fates can ne’er destroy,
’Till death o’ershadows all my joy!
When youthful revellers, round the bowl\
Dilating, mingle soul with soul /] Subjoined to Gail’s edition of Anacreon,
there are some curious letters upon the θιατοι of the ancients, which ap-
peared in the French Journals. At the opening of the Odeon in Paris, the
managers of the spectacle requested‘Professor Gail to give them some un-
common name for the fdtes of this institution. He suggested the word
“ Thiase,” which was adopted; but the literati of Paris questioned the pro-
priety of it, and addressed their criticisms to Gail through the medium of
the public prints. Two or three of the letters he has inserted in his edition,
and they have elicited from him some learned research on the subject.
ODE LI.
FLY not thus my brow of snow,
Lovely wanton! fly not so.
Though the wane of age is mine,
And the brilliant flush is thine,
Alberti has imitated this ode; and Capilupus, in the following epigram,
has given a version of it—
Cur, Lalage, mea vita, meos contemnis amores
Cur fugis e nostro pulchra puella sinu ?
Ne fugias, -sint sparsa licet mea tempora canis,
Jnque tuo roseus fulgeat ore color.
Aspice ut intextas deceant quoque flore corollas
Candida purpureis lilia mista rosis.
Why do you scom my soul's impassion’d vow,
Beloved Lalage! and fly my arms !
Is it, that winter has bestrew’d my brow,
And thine are all the rosy summer’s charms ?
Oh ! see the garland, cull’d in vernal weather,
Where the young rose-bud with the lily glows;
Thus—thus—a wreath of love we’ll twine together,
And I will be the lily, thou the rose!
Still I’m doom’d to sigh for thee,
Blest, if thou could’st sigh for me!
See—in yonder flowery braid,
Cull’d for thee, my blushing maid,
How the rose, of orient glow,
Mingles with the lily’s snow;
Mark, how sweet their tints agree,
Just, my girl, like thee and me!
See—in yonder flowery braid,
Cull'd for thee, my blushing maid f] “ In the same manner that Anacreon
pleads for the whiteness of his locks, from the beauty of the colour in gar-
lands, a shepherd, in Theocritus, endeavours to recommend his bl?ck
hair—
Και το to* i*tXeu> *r», x*i * γραττα imuuvOo;
Αλλ’ ί[ΑΤΓΑς ι» roif rifanoif τα πρώτα Xiy©raw.”
Longepierre, Barnes, See.
ODE LII.
AWAY—away—you men of rules,
What have I to do with schools ?
They’d make me learn—they’d make me think,
But would they make me love and drink?
Teach me this; and let me swim
My soul upon the goblet’s brim; ■
“ This is doubtless the work of a more modern poet than Anacreon; for
at the period when he lived rhetoricians were not known." Degen.
If this ode were not in the Vatican manuscript, I should be very much
inclined to agree in this argument against it's authenticity; for though the
dawnings of rhetoric might already have appeared, the first who gave it
any celebrity was Corax of Syracuse, and he flourished in the century after
Anacreon.
Our poet anticipated the ideas of Epicurus, in his aversion to the la-
bours of learning, as well as his devotion to voluptuousness. Π»<r»v veufua*
μακαριό* φιυγιτι, said the philosopher of pleasure, in a letter to Pythocles.
Teach me this, and let me twine
My arms around the nymph divine 1
Age begins to blanch my brow,
I’ve time for nought but pleasure now—
Fly—and cool my goblet’s glow,
At yonder fountain’s gelid flow;
I’ll quaffi my boy, and calmly sink
This soul to slumber as I drink I
Soon—too soon—my jocund slave,
You’ll deck your master’s grassy grave;
Tauk me tils, and kt me tume
My arms around the nymph divine f} By χρυβΐκ Afptm* here, i under-
stand some beautiful girl, in the same manner that Λυαιο; is often used
fm wine. M Golden” is frequently ao epithet of beauty. Tbos in Virgil
“ Yenne an retand m Properties u Cynthia aerea." Tiknttes, however,
calls an old woman, “ golden.”
The translation d’Autori Anonimi, as usual, wantons on this passage of
Anacreon—
£ m'insegoi coo pin rare
Forme accorte dftnvohu*
Ad amabile bettade
II bel cinto d’ onestade.
And there’s an end—for ah! you know
They drink but little wine below!
And there's an end—for ah ! you know
They drink hut little wine below f] Thus the witty Mainard—
La Mort nous guette; et quand ses lois
Nous ont enferm& une fois
Au eein d’une fosse profonde,
Adieu bone vins et bon repas,
Ma science ne trouve pas
Des cabarets en l’autre monde. *
From Mainard, Gombauld, and De Cailly, old French poets, all the
best epigrams of the English language are borrowed.
ODE LIII.
'When I behold the festive train
Of dancing youth, I’m young again !
Memory wakes her magic trance,
And wings me lightly through the dance.
Come—Cybeba—smiling maid !
Cull the flower and twine the braid;
Bid the blush of summer’s rose
Burn upon my brow of snows;
Bid the blush of summer's rose
Burn upon my brow of snows; Licetus, in his Hieroglyphics, quot-
ing two of our poet’s odes, where be calls for garlands, remarks—“ Con-
stat igitur floreas coronas poetis et potantibus in symposio convenire non
autem sapientibus et philosophiam affectantibus.” “ It appears that
wreaths of flowers were adapted for poets and revellers at banquets, but
by no means became those who had pretensions to wisdom and philo-
sophy.” On this principle, in his 152d chapter, he discovers a refinement
in Virgil, describing the garland of the poet Silenus, as fallen off; which
distinguishes, he thinks, the divine intoxication of Silenus from that of
common drunkards, who always wear their crowns while they drink. This
indeed is the “ labor ineptiarum” of commentators.
And let me, while the wild and young,
Trip the mazy dance along,
Fling my heap of years away,
And be as wild, as young as they.
Hither haste—some cordial soul!
Give my lips the brimming bowl;
Oh ! you will see this hoary sage
Forget his locks, forget his age.
He still can chant the festive hymn,
He still can kiss the goblet’s brim ;
He still can act the mellow raver,
And play the fool as sweet as ever!
He still can kiss the goblet's brim; &ci] Wine is prescribed by Galen, as
an excellent medicine for old men. “ Quod frigidos et humoribus exple- ·
tos calefaciat, &cbut Nature was Anacreon's physician.
There is a proverb in Eriphus, as quoted by Athenaeus, which says,
“ that wine makes an old man dance whether he will or not.”—-
Αογος ις αρχβιβί, m χαχως ιχ«»,
Oim Xtywt m γμοντας, u Tariff
n»0f(v χορίιιιν a ΟιλβττΜ.
ODE LIV.
METHINKS, the pictur’d bull we see
Is amorous Jove—it must be he 1
How fondly blest he seems to bear
That fairest of Phoenician fair!
How proud he breasts the foamy tide,
And spurns the billowy surge aside 1
“ This ode is written upon a picture which represented the rape of
' Europa.” Madame Dacier.
It may perhaps be considered as a description of one of those coins,
which the Sidonians struck off in honor of Europe, representing a woman
carried across the sea by a ball. Thus Natalis Comes. Kb. rm. cap. 23.
" Sidonii numismata cum foemind tauri dorso insidente ac mare transfre-
tante, cuderunt in ejue honorem.” In the little treatise upon the goddess
of Syria, attributed very falsely to Lucian, there is mention of this coin,
and of a temple dedicated by the Sidonians to Astarte, whom some, it ap-
pears, confounded with Europe.
Moschus has written a very beautiful idyll on the story of Europa.
Could any beast, of vulgar vein,
Undaunted thus defy the main ?
No—he descends from climes above,
He looks the God—he breathes of Jove !
No—he descends from cbmes abnvey
He looks the God—he breathes of Jove /} Thus Moschus—
Κρυψι Siov xcu τριφί ίιμχς’ xeu γινιτο rχνρος.
The God forgot himself, his heaven, for love,
And a tmlFs form belied th* almighty Jove.
ODE LV.
WHILE we invoke the wreathed spring,
Resplendent rose ! to thee we’ll sing—
Resplendent rose, the flower of flowers,
Whose breath perfumes Olympus’ bowers;
This ode is a brilliant panegyric on the rose. “ All antiquity (says
Barnes) has produced nothing more beautiful.”
From the idea of peculiar excellence, which the ancients attached to this
flower, arose a pretty proverbial expression, used by Aristophanes, accord-
ing to Suidas—poiot pupwcxf, “ You have spoken roses”—a phrase some-
what similar to the “ dire des fleurettes” of the French. In the same idea
of excellence originated, I doubt not, a very curious application of the
word ροών, for which the inquisitive reader may consult Gaulminus upon
the epithalamium of our poet, where it is introduced in the romance of
Theodorus. Muretus, in one of his elegies, calls his mistress his rose.
Jam te igitur rursus teneo, formosula, jam te
(Quid trepidas ?) teneo; jam, rosa, te teneo. Eleg. 8.
Now I again embrace thee, dearest—
(Tell me, wanton, why thou fcarest ?)
*
Again my longing arms infold thee,
Again, my rose, again I hold thee.
Whose virgin blush, of chasten’d dye,
Enchants so much our mortal eye.
When pleasure’s bloomy season glows,
The graces love to twine the rose ;
The rose is warm Dione’s bliss,
And flushes like Dione's kiss!
This, like moet of the terms of endearment in the modern Latin poets,
is taken from Plautus; they were vulgar and colloquial in his time, and
they are among the elegancies of the modern Latinists.
Passeratius alludes to the ode before us, in the beginning of his poem
on the Rose.
Carmine digna rosa est; vellem caneretur ut illam
Teius argutft cecinit testudine vates-
Resplendeat rose! to thee we'll sing."] I have passed over the line rv>
iratpu αυζ» ji«λιπι>—it is corrupt in this original reading, and has been very
little improved by the annotators. I should suppose it to be an interpola-
tion, if it were not for a line which occurs afterwards—φψ Ai φυσ-tv λιγωμιν.
The rose is warm Dione''s bliss, &c.~\ Belleau, in a note upon an old
French poet, quoting the original here «ρροΑβ·ιο» rc&vpfMt, translates it—
“ comme les delices et mignardises de Venus.”
Oft has the poet’s magic tongue
The rose’s fair luxuriance sung·;
And long the Muses, heavenly maids,
Have rear’d it in their tuneful shades.
Oft has the poet"s magic tongue,
The rose's fair luxuriance sung; &cJ] The following is a fragment of the
Lesbian poetess. It is cited in the Romance of Achilles Tatius, who ap-
pears to have resolved the numbers into prose—
Ei της avStr» lAtXt» i Ζινς tw&tw»ι βαβΊλια, το poiw ut rtm ouAum «CeriXfUf.
γι\ς tft χοίρος, φντων αγλαΙσμα, Οφθαλμός mAtt», λιιμανος ιρν^ηρα, χαλλο; ρβχ-
το». Ερωτος <κ«», Αφέτην irpofcmi, tvuftn φυλλοις χο/χα, nnctnrrot; «τταλοκ τρυφ».
το ιτιταλο» τ» Ζιφυρω γιΧ».
If Jove would give the leafy bowers,
A queen for all their world of flowere,
The rose would be the choice of Jove,
And blush, the queen of every grove—
Sweetest child of weeping morning,
Gem, the vest of earth adorning,
Eye of flowrets, glow of lawns,
Bud of beauty, nurs’d by dawns.
Soft the soul of love it breathes,
Cypria’s brow with magic wreathes,
When, at the early glance of morn,
It sleeps upon the glittering thorn,
*Tis sweet to dare the tangled fence,
To cull the timid floweret thence,
And wipe with tender hand away,
The tear that on it’s blushes lay!
’Tis sweet to hold the infant stems,
Yet dropping with Aurora’s gems,
And fresh inhale the spicy sighs,
That from the weeping buds arise.
When revel reigns, when mirth is high,
And Bacchus beams in every eye,
Our rosy fillets scent exhale,
And fill with balm the fainting gale!
Oh ! there is nought in nature bright,
Where roses do not shed their light!
And, to the Zephyr’s warm caresses,
Diffuses all it’s verdant tresses,
’Till, glowing with the wanton’s play,
It blushes a diviner ray !
When morning paints the orient skies,
Her fingers burn with roseate dies;
The nymphs display the rose’s charms,
It mantles o’er their graceful arms ;
Through Cytherea’s form it glows,
And mingles with the living snows.
The rose distills a healing balm,
The beating pulse of pain to calm ;
Preserves the cold, inurned clay,
And mocks the vestige of decay.
When morning paints the orient skies,
Her fingers hum with roseate dies;	In the original here, he enu-
merates the many epithets of beeety, borrowed from roses, which were used
by the poets, iraf» t«* mpm. We see that poets were dignified in Greece
with the title of sages : even the careless Anacreon, who lived but for love
and voluptuousness, was called by Plato the wise Anacreon. Fuit haec sa-
pientia quondam.
Preserves the cold inurned clay,	He	here	alludes	to	the	use of the
rose in embalming; and, perhaps (as Barnes thinks), to the rosy unguent
with which Venus anointed the corpse of Hector. Homer’s Iliad ψ. It
may likewise regard the ancient practice of putting garlands of roses on the
dead, as in Statius, Theb. lib. x. 784.—
And when at length, in- pale decline,
It’s florid beauties fade and pine,
Sweet as in youth, it’s balmy breath
Diffuses odour even in death 1
------hi sertis, hi veris honore soluto
Accumulant artus patrt&que in sede reponunt
Corpus odoratum—
Where “ veris honor,” though it mean every kind of flowers, may seem
more particularly to refer to the rose, which our poet in another ode calls
tapoc μίλημα. We read, in the Hieroglyphics of Pierius, lib. lv. that some
of the ancients used to order in their wills, that roses should be annually
scattered on their tombs, and he has adduced some sepulchral inscriptions
to this purpose.
And mochs the vestige of decay."] When he says that this flower prevails
over time itself, he still alludes to it’s efficacy in embalment (teneri pone-
ret ossa rosd. Propert. lib. i. cleg. 17), or perhaps -to the subsequent idea
of it’s fragrance surviving it’s beauty ; for he can scarcely mean to praise
for duration the ** nimium breves flores” of the rose. Philostratus com-
pares this flower with love, and says, that they both defy the influence of
time—χ/som St κτϊ Ερως, m ptSm «S», Unfortunately the similitude lies not
in their duration, but their transience.
Sweet as m youth, it's bahuy irteik,
Diffuses odour even in death f] Thus Caspar Bariseus, in bit Ritus Nup-
tiarum—
Oh 1 whence could such a plant have sprung ?
Attend—for thus the tale is sung.
When, humid from the silv’ry stream,
Effusing beauty’s warmest beam,
Venus appear’d, in flushing hues,
Mellow’d by ocean’s briny dews—
When, in the starry courts above,
The pregnant brain of mighty Jove
Disclos’d the nymph of azure glance—
The nymph who shakes the martial lance 1
Then, then, in strange eventful hour,
The earth produc’d an infant flower,
Which sprung, with blushing tinctures drest, .
And wanton’d o’er it’s parent’s breast.
Ambrosium late rosa tunc quoque spargit odorem,
Cum fhiit, aut multo languida sole jacet.
Nor then the rose it’s odour loses,
When all it’s flushing beauties die;	*
Nor less ambrosial balm diffuses,
When wither’d by the solar eye !
The gods beheld this brilliant birth,
And hail’d the Rose—the boon of earth!
With nectar-drops, a ruby tide,
The sweetly-orient buds they dyed,
WitH nectar-drops, a ruby tide,
The sweetly-orient buds they dyed, ©V.] The author of the " Pervigilium
Veneris” (a poem attributed to Catullus, the stile of which appears to me
to have all the laboured luxuriance of a much later period), ascribes the
tincture of the rose to the blood from the wound of Adonis.
rosae
Fusae aprino de cruore—
This is according to the emendation of Lipsius. In the following epigram
this hue is differently accounted for.
Illa quidem studiosa suum defendere Adoni m,
Gradivus stricto quem petit ense ferox,
Affixit duris vestigia caeca rosetis,
Albaque divino picta cruore rosa est.
\
While the enamour'd queen of joy
Flies to protect her lovely boy,.
On whom the jealous war-god rushes ;
She treads upon a thorned rose,
And while the wound with crimson flows,
The snowy flowret feels her blood and blushes !
And bade them bloom, the flowers divine
Of him who sheds the teeming vine;
And bade them, on the spangled thorn
Expand their bosoms to the morn 1
*
ODE LVI.
He, who instructs the youthful crew
To bathe them in the brimmer’s dew,
And taste, uncloy’d by rich excesses,
All the bliss that wine possesses I
He, who inspires the youth to glance
In winged circlets thro’ the dance;
Bacchus, the god again is here,
And leads along the blushing year;
The blushing year with rapture teems,
Ready to shed those cordial streams,
“ Compare with this elegant ode the verses of Uz. Lib. i. die Wein-
lese.” Degen.
This appears to be one of the hymns which were sung at the anniversary
festival of the vintage; one of the mXnwoi ψνοι, as our poet himself terms
them in the fifty-ninth ode. We cannot help feeling a peculiar veneration
for these relics of the religion of antiquity. Horace may be supposed to
have written the nineteenth ode of his second book, and the twenty-fifth t
of the third, for some bacchanalian celebration of this kind.
Which, sparkling in the cup of mirth,
Illuminate the sons of earth!
And when the ripe and vermil wine,
Sweet infant of the pregnant vine,
Which now in mellow clusters swells,
Oh 1 when it burst9 it’s rosy cells,
The heavenly stream shall mantling flow,
To balsam every mortal woe!
No youth shall then be wan or weak,
For dimpling health shall light the cheek;
No heart shall then desponding sigh,
For wine shall bid despondence fly!
Thus—-till another autumn’s glow
Shall bid another vintage flow!
fWkieh) sparkling in the cup of mirth,
Illuminate the sons of earth /] In the original «-«το» «rom χψιζνν. Madame
Dacier thinks that the poet here had the nepenthe of Homer in his mind.
Odyssey, lib. ir. This nepenthe wae a something of exquisite charm, in-
fused by Helen into the wine of her guests, which had tbe power of dis-
pelling every anxiety. A French writer, with very elegant gallantly, con-
jectures that this spell, which made the bowl so beguiling, was the charm
of Helen’s conversation. See De Mer€, quoted by Bayle Art. Helene.
ODE LVII.
AND whose immortal hand could shed
Upon this disk the ocean’s bed ?
And, in a frenzied flight of soul
Sublime as hearen’s eternal pole,
This ode is a very’animated description of a picture of Venus 4n a dis-
cus, which represented the goddess in her first emergence from the waves.
About two centurics after our poet wrote, the pencil of the artist Apelles
embellished this subject, in his famous painting of die Venus Anadyomeni,
the model of which, as Pliny informs us, was the beautiful CampaSpe, given
to him by Alexander; though, according to Natalis Comes, lib. vij. cap. ]6,
it was Phryne who sat to Apelles for the face and breast of this Venus.
There are a few blemishes in the reading of the ode before us, which
have influenced Faber, Heyne, Brun'ck, &c. to denounce the whole poem
as spurious. Non ego paucis offendar maculis. I think it is beautiful
enough to be authentic.
And 'whose immortal hand could shed
Upon this dish the ocean's bed?] The abruptness of «f« t»j Topsm tromv,
is finely expressive of sudden admiration, and is one of thoee beauties, which
wt cannot bat admire in their source, though, by frequent imitation, they
are now become languid and unimpressive.
Imagine thus, in semblance warm,
The Queen of Love’s voluptuous form,
Floating along the silv’ry sea,
In beauty’s naked majesty!
Oh ! he has given the captur’d sight
A witching banquet of delight;
And all those sacred scenes of love,
Where only hallow’d eyes may rove,
Lie faintly-glowing, half-conceal’d,
Within the lucid billows veil’d.
Light as the leaf, that summer’s breeze
Has wafted o’er the glassy seas,
She floats upon the ocean’s breast,
Which undulates in sleepy rest,
And all those sacred scenes of love,
Where only hallow'd eyes may rove,	The picture here has all the
delicate character of the semi-reducta Venus, and is the sweetest emblem
of what the poetry of passion ought to be; glowing but through a veil, and
stealing upon the heart from concealment. Few of the ancients have at-
tained this modesty of description, which is like the golden cloud that
hung over Jupiter and Juno, impervious to every beam but that of fancy.
And stealing on, she gently pillows
Her bosom on the amorous billows.
Her bosom, like the humid rose,
Her neck, like dewy-sparkling snows,
Illume the liquid path she traces,
And burn within the stream’s embraces!
In languid luxury soft she glides,
Incircled by the azure tides,
Like some fair lily, faint with weeping,
Upon a bed of violets sleeping 1
Beneath their queen’s inspiring glance,
The dolphins o’er the green sea dance,
Her bosom, like the humid rose,	“	Pohm (says an anonymous anno-
tator), is a whimsical epithet for the bosom.” Neither Catullus nor Gray
have been of his opinion. The former has the expression—
En hie in roseis latet papillis.
And the latter—
Lo! where the rosy-bosom’d hours, &c.
Crottus, a modern Latinist, might indeed be censured for too vague
an use of the epithet “ rosy,” when he applies it to the eyes “ e roseis
oculis.”
Bearing in triumph young desire,
And baby love with smiles of fire !
While, sparkling on the silver waves,
The tenants of the briny caves,
Around the pomp in eddies play.
And gleam along the watery way.
--------------young desire,	In the original 'Ιμμκ, who was the
same deity with Jocus among the Romans. Aurelias Augurtllue has a
poem beginning—
Invitat dim Bacchus ad Cfenan snos
Comoo, Jocum, Cupidiafetn.
Which Parnell has closely imitated—
Gay Bacchus, liking Eeteourt’s wide,
A noble meal bespoke usj
And for the guests that were to dine,
Brought Com us, Love and Jocus, &c.
ODE LYIII.
When gold, as fleet as zephyr’s pinion,
Escapes like any faithless minion,
And flies me (as he flies me ever)
Do I pursue him ? never—never—
I have followed Barnes's arrangement of this ode; it deviates somewhat
from the Vatican M S. but it appeared to me to be the more natural order.
When gold, as fleet as zephyr's pinion,
Escapes like any faithless mimo», In the original *0 <!/>**τηκ ό χρυσός.
There is a kind of pun in these words, as Madame Dacier has already re-
marked ; for Chrysos, which signifies gold, was also a frequent name for a.
slave. In one of Lucian’s dialogues, there is, I think, a similar play upon
the word, where the followers of Chrysippus are called golden fishes. The
puns of the ancients are in general even more vapid than our own $ some
of the best are those recorded of Diogenes.
And flies me (as he flies vu ever), &c.~] A» S', au f*t φιυγα. This grace
of iteration has already been taken notice of. Though sometimes merely a
playful beauty, it is peculiarly expressive of impassioned sentiment, and we
may easily believe that it was one of the many sources of that energetic
sensibility which breathed through the stile of Sappho. See Gyrald. Vet.
Poet. 'Dial. 9. It will not be said that this is a mechanical ornament by
Why, let the false deserter go—
Who would pursue his direst foe ?
But, when I feel my lighten’d mind
No more by ties of gold confin’d,
I loosen all my clinging cares,
And cast them to the vagrant airs.
Then—then 1 feel the Muse’s spell,
And wake to life the dulcet shell;
The dulcet shell to beauty sings,
And love dissolves along the strings!
Thus, when my heart is sweetly taught
How little gold deserves a thought,
That winged slave returns once more,
And with him wafts delicious store
any one who can feel it's charm in those lines of Catullus, where he com-
plains of the infidelity of his mistress, Lesbia.
Coeli, Lesbia nostra, Lesbia illa,
Illa Lesbia, quam Catullus unam,
Plus quam se atque suos amavit omnes,
Nunc	■
Si sic omnia dixisset!—but the rest does not bear citation.
Of racy wine, whose balmy art
In slumber seals the anxious heart 1
Again he tries my soul to sever
From love and song—perhaps for ever \
Away—deceiver! why pursuing
Ceaseless thus my heart’s undoing?
Sweet is the song of amorous fire;
Sweet are the sighs that thrill the lyre;
Oh 1 sweeter far than all the gold,
The waftage of thy wings can hold.
I well remember all thy wiles—
They wither’d Cupid’s flowery smiles,
And o’er his harp such garbage shed,
I thought it’s angel breath was fled!
They tainted all his bowl of blisses,
His bland desires and hallow’d kisses.
They tainted all his bowl of bUstes,
His Hand desires end kalhw'd iwxrx.] Original—
Φ*Χ*1*Ατνν it
Πβ0Μ» χνιτιλλα tufimt.
Oh! fly to haunts of sordid men—
But rove not near the bard again ;
Thy glitter in the Muse’s shade,
Scares, from her bower the tuneful maid ?
And not for worlds would I forego
That moment of poetic glow,
When my full soul, in Fancy’s stream,
Pours o’er the lyre, it’s swelling theme.
Away—away—to worldlings hence,
Who feel not this diviner sense,
And with thy gay, fallacious blaze,
Dazzle their unrefined gaze,
t
Horace has “ Desideri que temperare poculum/* not figuratively, how-
ever, like Anacreon, but importing the love-philtres of the witches. By
“ cups of kieses” our poet may allude to a favourite gallantry among the
ancients, of drinking when the lips of-their mistresses had touched the
brim—
“ Or leave a kiss within the cup,
“ And 1Ί1 not ask for wine.”
As in Ben Johnson’s translation from Philostratns; and Lucian has a
conceit upon the same idea, “ 'lm tuu wmt **** ?iXw,” *< so that you
may at once both drink and kiss.”
ODE LIX.
S ABLED by the solar beam,
Now the fiery clusters teem,
In osier baskets, borne along
By all the festal vintage throng
Of rosy youths and virgins fair,
Ripe as the melting fruits they bear.
Now—now they press the pregnant grapes,
And now'the captive stream escapes,
In fervid tide of nectar gushing,
And for it’s bondage proudly blushing !
The tide Εχιληκοί ύμνος, which Barnes has given to this ode, is by no
means appropriate. We have already had one of those hymns (ode 56), but
this is a description of the vintage; and the title «; omv, which it bears in
the Vatican MS. is more correct than any that have been suggested.
Degen, in the true spirit of literary scepticism, doubts that this ode is
genuine, without assigning any reason for such a suspicion. “ Non amo
te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare”—but this is far from satisfactory cri-
ticism.
While, round the vat’s impurpled brim,
The choral song, the vintage hymn
Of rosy youths and virgins fair,
Steals on the cloy’d and panting air.
Mark—how they drink, with all their eyes,
The orient tide that sparkling flies;
The infant balm of all their fears,
The infant Bacchus, born in tears!
When he, whose verging years decline
As deep into the vale as mine,
When he inhales the vintage-spring,
His heart is fire—his foot’s a wing;
And while he flies, his hoary hair
Plays truant with the wanton air!
While the warm youth, whose wishing soul
Has kindled o’er the inspiring bowl,
Impassion’d seeks the shadowy grove,
Where, in the tempting guise of love,
Reclining sleeps some witching maid,
Whose sunny charms, but half-display’d,
ΟΡΧβ Of AITACIL&QN.	290
Blush thro’ the bower, that closely-twin’d,
Excludes the kieses of the wind!
The virgin wakes—the glowing boy
Allures her to th* embrace of joy;
Swears that the herbage heaven had spread,
Was sacred as the nuptial bed;
That laws should never bind desire.
And love was nature’s holiest fire 1
The virgin weeps—the virgin sighs—
He kiss’d her lips—he kiss’d her eyes;
The sigh was balm, the tear was dew,
They only rais’d his flame anew.
Swears that the herbage heaven had spread,
Was sacred as the nuptial bed; 6?c.] The original here has been vari-
ously interpreted. Some, in their zeal for our author’s purity, have sup·
posed, that the youth only persuades her to a premature marriage. Others
understand from the words χροίοτιν yxfjun yma-S'»», that he seduces her to a
violation of the nuptial vow. The turn which I have given it is somewhat
like the sentiment of Helo'isa—“ amorem conjugio, libertatem vinculo
praeferre.” The Italian translations have almost all wantoned upon this
description ; but that of Marchetti is indeed “ nimium lubricus aspici.”
And oh! he stole the sweetest flower,
That ever bloom’d in any bower 1
Such is the madness wine imparts,
Whene’er it steals on youthful hearts.
ODE LX.
AWAKE to life, my dulcet shell,
To Phoebus all thy s«*fis shall swell ;
And though no glorious prize be thine,
No Pythian wreath around thee twine,
Yet every hour is glory’s hour
To him, who gathers wisdom’s flower!
Then wake 1 thee from thy magic slumbers,
Breathe to the soft and Phrygian numbers»
Which, as my trembling lips repeat,
Thy chords shall echo back as sweet.
The cygnet thus, with fading notes,
As down Cayster’s tide he floats,
This hymn to Apollo is supposed not to have been written by Anacreon,
and it certainly is rather a sublimer flight than the Teian wing is accus-
tomed to soar. But we ought not to judge from this diversity of stile, in
a poet of whom time has preserved us such partial relics. If we knew Ho·
Plays with his snowy plumage fair
Upon the wanton murmuring air,
Which amorously lingers round,
And sighs responsive sound for sound 1
Muse of the Lyre 1 illume my dream—
Thy Phoebus is my fancy’s theme $
And hallow’d is the harp I bear,
. And hallow’d is the wreath I wear,
Hallow'd by him, the god of lays
Who modulates the choral maze!
I sing the love, which Daphne twin'd
Around the god-head’s yielding mind;
I sing the blushing Daphne’* flight
From this aetherial youth of light;
race but as a satirist, should we easily believe there could dwell such ani-
mation in his lyre ? We are told by Suidas, that oar poet wrote hymns,
and this perhaps is one of them. We can perceive in what an altered and
imperfect state we have his works at present, when we find a scholiast
upon Horace citing an ode from the third book of Anacreon.
And how the tender, timid maid
Flew panting to the kindly shade,
Resign’d a form, too tempting fair,
And grew a verdant laurel there;
Whose leaves, with sympathetic thrill,
In terror seem’d to tremble still!
The God pursued, with wing’d desire;
And when his hopes were all on fire,
And when he thought to hear the sigh,
With which enamour’d virgins die,
And how the timid\ lender maid
Flew panting to the kindly shade, 6ft.] Original—
To /uv iXTifnyi xtrrpov,
Φυσ-fWf it«fjuttpt μορφήν.
I find the word xtrrpov here has a double force, as it also signifies that
“ omnium parentem, quam sanctus Numa, &c. &c.” (See Martial). In or-
der to confirm this import of the word here, those who are curious in new
readings, may place the stop after φυνως, thus—
To f*tv ιχτιφιυγι xtrrpov
Φυ<τ<«;, fxfAtupt μορφήν.
He only heard the pensive air,
Whispering amid her leafy hair!
But oh 1 my soul—no more—no more—
Enthusiast—whither do I soar ?
This sweetly-mad’ning dream of soul
Has hurried me beyond the goal.
Why should I sing the mighty darts,
Which fly to wound celestial hearts,
When sure the lay, with sweeter tone,
Can tell the darts that wound my own.
Still be Anacreon—still inspire
The descant of the Teian lyre s
Still he Anacreonr^-still inspire
The descant of the Teian lyre.~\ The original is Το» Avaxptorra pips. I
have translated it under the supposition that the hymn is by Anacreon;
though I fear, from this very line, that hie claim to it can acarcely be sup-
ported.
To» Avaxpiorra. fMfis—“ Imitate Anacreon.” Such is the lesson given us
by the lyrist; and if, in poetry, a simple elegance of sentiment, enriched
by the most playful felicities of fancy, be a charm which invites or deserves
imitation, where shall we find such a guide as Anacreon ? In morality too,
with some little reserve, I think we might not blush to follow in his foOt-
Still let the nectar’d numbers float,
Distilling love in every note!
And when the youth, whose burning soul
Has felt the Paphian star’s controul,
When he the liquid lays shall hear,
His heart will flutter to his ear,
And drinking there of song divine*
Banquet on intellectual wine 1
steps. For if his song be the language of his heart, though luxurious and
relaxed, he was artless and benevolent; and who would not forgive a few
irregularities, when atoned for by virtues so rare and so endearing ? When
we think of the sentiment in those lines—
Away! I hate the slanderous dart,
Which steals to wound th’ unwary heart*
How many are there in the world, to whom we would wish to say T»*
Avxxptovra pips 1
Here ends the last of the odes in the Vatican MS. whose authority con-
firms the genuine antiquity of them all, though a few have stolen among
the number, which we may hesitate in attributing to Anacreon. In the
little essay prefixed to this translation, I observed that Barnes has quoted
this manuscript incorrectly, relying upon an imperfect copy of it, which
Isaac Vossius bad taken; I shall just mention two or three instances of
this inaccuracy, the first which occur to me. In the ode of the Dove, on.
the words Πτιροιη νυγχβλνψ», he says, “ Vatican M S. rwxw^w, etiam Pris-
ciano invito,” now the M S. reads β·υ«α*λυψ«, with wnuam interlined. De-
gen too, on the same line, is somewhat in error. In the twenty· second
ode of this series, line thirteenth, the M S. has mm, with «1 interlined, and
Barnes imputes to it the reading of ταώι. In the fifty-seventh, line twelfth,
he professes to have preserved the reading of the M S. Αλ*λφα* ft* «un,
while the latter has «λβλη/Μwj 11w «ντ«. Almost all the other annotators
have transplanted these errors from Barnes.
ODE LXI.
GOLDEN hues of youth are fled;
Hoary locks deform my head.
Bloomy graces, dalliance gay,
All the flowers of life decay.
The intrusion of this melancholy ode, among the careless levities of our
poet, has always reminded me of the skeletons, which the Egyptians used
to hang up in their banquet-rooms, to inculcate a thought of mortality
even amidst the dissipations of mirth. If it were not for the beauty of its
numbers, the Teian Muse should disown this ode—Quid habet illius, illius
quae spirabat amores ?
To Stobaeus we are indebted for it.
Bloomy graces, dalliance gay,
* ·*
All the flowers of life decay."] Horace often, with feeling and elegance,
deplores the fugacity of human enjoyments. See book n, ode xi.; and thus
in the second epistle, book ii.
Singula de nobis anni praedantur euntes .
Eripuere jocos, venerem, convivia, ludum.
Withering age begins to trace
Sad memorials o’er my face;
Time has shed it’s sweetest bloom,
All the future must be gloom 1
I
This it is that sets me sighing;
Dreary is the thought of dying!
Pluto’s is a dark abode,
Sad the journey—sad the road.
The wing of every passing day»
Withers some blooming joy away;
And wails from our enamour’d arms,
The banquet’s mirth, the virgin’s charms.
Dreary is the thought of dying !	Regnier, a libertine French poet,
has written some sonnets on the approaph of death, full of gloomy and
trembling repentance. Chaulieu, however, supports more consistently the
spirit of the Epicurean Philosopher. See his poem, addressed to the Mar-
quis La Farre.
Plus j’approche du terme et moins je le redoute, &c.
I shall leave it to the moralist to make his reflections here; it is impos-
sible to be very anacreontic on such e subject.
And when once our travel's o’er,
Ah 1—we can return no more !
And when once our travel's o'er,
Ah!—we can return no more /] Scaliger, upon Catullus’s well-known
lines, “ Qui nunc it per iter, &c." remarks, that Acheron, with the same
idea, is called »νιζοίος by Theocritus, and Jtaoby Nicander.
ODE LXII.
FILL me, boy, as deep a draught,
As e’er was fill’d, as e’er was quaff’d;
But let the water amply flow,
To cool the grape’s intemperate glow;
This ode consists of two fragments, which arc to be found in Athenaeus,
book x, and which Barnes, from the similarity of their tendency, has com·
bined into one. I think this a very justifiable liberty, and have adopted it
in some other fragments of our poet.
Degen refers us here to verses of Uz, lib. iv. der Trinker.
But let the water amply flow,
To cool the grape's intemperate glow;	It was Amphictyon who first
taught the Greeks to mix water with their wine; in commemoration of
which circumstance they erected altars to Bacchus and the nymphs. On
this mythological allegory the following epigram is founded—
Ardentem ex utero Semeles lav£re Lyaeum
Naiades, extincto fulminis igne sacri;
Cum nymphis igitur tractabilis, at sine nymphis
Candenti rursus fulmine corripitur.
Pierius Valerianus.
Let not the fiery god be single,
But with the nymphs in union mingle.
For tho’ the bowl’s the grave of sadness,
Oh! be it ne’er the birth of madness 1
No—banish from our board to-night,
The revelries of rude delight 1
To Scythians leave these wild excesses,
Our’s be the jay that soothes and blesses I
And while the temperate bowl we wreathe,
Our choral hymns shall sweetly breathe,
Beguiling every hour along
With harmony of soul and song!
Which is, non verbum verbo,
While heavenly fire consum'd his Theban dame,
A Naiad caught young Bacchus from the flame,
And dipp’d him burning in her purest lymph;
Still—still he loves the sea-maid’s chrystal urn,
And when his native fires infuriate burn,
He bathes him in the fountain of the nymph.
ODE LXUI.
TO Love, the soft and blooming child,
I touch the harp in descant wild;
To Love, the babe of Cyprian boWers,
The boy, who breathes and blushes flowers!
To Love—for heaven and earth adore him,
And gods and mortals bow before him!
“ This fragment is preserved in Clemens Alexandrinus Strom, lib. vi.
and in Arsenius Collect. Graec.” Barnes.
It appears to have been the opening of a hymn in praise of Love.
/
ODE LXIV,
HASTE thee, nymph, whose winged spear
Wounds the fleeting mountain-deer!
Dian, Jove’s immortal child,
Huntress of the savage wild!
Goddess, with the sun-bright hair!
Listen to a people’s prayer,
This hymn to Diana is extant in Hephaestion. There is an anecdote of
„ our poet, which has led some to doubt whether he ever wrote any odea of
this kind. It is related by the Scholiast upon Pindar, (fsthmionic. od. ii.
v. 1. as cited by Barnes). Anacreon being asked, why he addressed all his
hymns to women and none to the deities ? answered—“ because women
are my deities.”
I have assumed the same liberty in reporting this anecdote, which I have
done in translating some of the odes; and it were to be wished that these
little infidelities were always considered pardonable in the interpretation of
t
the ancients; thus, when nature is forgotten in the original, in the trans-
lation " tamen usque recurret.”
Turn—to Lethe’s river turn,
There thy vanquish’d people mourn!
Come to Lethe’s wavy shore,
And thy people’s peace restore.
Thine their hearts—their altars thine—
Dian! must they—must they pine ?
Turn—to Lethe's river turn,
There thy vanquish'd people mourn /J Lethe, a river of Ionia, according to
Strabo, falling into the Meander: near to it was situated the town Mag-
nesia, in favour of whose inhabitants our poet is supposed to have addressed
this supplication to Diana. It was written (as Madame Dacier conjec-
tares), on the occasion of some battle, in which the Magnesians had been
defeated.
ODE LXV.
Like a wanton filly sporting,
Maid of Thrace I thou fly’st my courting.
Wanton filly! tell me why
Thou trip’st away, with scornful eye,
And seem'st to think my doting heart
Is novice in the bridling art ?
Believe me, girl, it is not so—
Thou’lt find this skilful hand can throw
The reins upon thy tender form,
However wild—however warm 1
This ode, which is addressed to some Thracian girl, exists in Heraclides,
and has been imitated very frequently by Horace, as all the annotators have
remarked. Madame Dacier rejects the allegory, which runs so obviously
throughout it, and supposes it to have been addressed to a young mare be-
longing to Polycrates; there is more modesty than ingenuity in the lady’s
conjecture.
Pierius, in the fourth book of his Hieroglyphics, cites tbis~ode, and in-
forms us, that a horse was the hieroglyphical emblem of pride.
Thou’lt find that I can tame thy force,
And turn and wind thee in the course.
Though wanton wasting now thine hours,
Thou sportest o’er the herbs and flowers,
Thou soon shalt feel the rein’s controul,
And tremble at the wish’d-for goal!
ODE LXVI.
TO thee, the Queen of nymphs divine,
Fairest of all that fairest shine ;
To thee, thou blushing young desire,
Who rul’st the world with darts of fire !
And oh 1 thou nuptial power, to thee
Who bear’st of life the guardian key ;
Breathing my soul in fragrant praise,
And weaving wild my votive lays,
For thee, oh Queen! I wake the lyre,
For thee, thou blushing young desire !
This ode is introduced in the Romance of Theodorus Prodromus, and
is that kind of epithalamium which was sung like a scolium at the nuptial
banquet.
Among the many works of the impassioned Sappho (commissi calores
foliae fidibus puellae), of which time and ignorant superstition have de-
prived us, the loss of her epithalamiums is not one of the least that we de-
plore. A subject so interesting to an amorous fancy, was warmly felt, and
And oh! for thee, thou nuptial power,
Come, and illume this genial hour.
Look on thy bride, luxuriant boy 1
And while thy lambent glance of joy
Plays over all her blushing charms,
Delay not—snatch her to thine arms,
Before the lovely, trembling prey,
Like a young birdling, wing away I
Oh ! Stratocles—impassion’d youth I
Dear to the Queen of amorous truth,
And dear to her, whose yielding zone
Will soon resign her all thine own;
Turn to Myrilla, turn thine eye,
Breathe to Myrilla, breathe thy sigh I
must have been warmly described by such a soul and such an imagination.
The following lines are cited as a relic of one of her epithalamiums—
Ολίιι γαμζμ. <roi f*cv in γαμ,ος ως χρχο,
EκτίτίλΐΓ, ιχιΐί it 7r«pSim av xpxo.
See Scaliger, in his Poetics, on the Epithalamium.
To those bewitching beauties turn,
For thee they mantle, flush and burn!
Not more the rose, the queen of flowers,
Outblushes all the glow of bowers,
Than she umivaird bloom discloses,
The sweetest rose where all are roses!
Oh 1 may the sun, benignant, shed
His blandest influence o'er thy bed;
And foster there an infant tree,
To blush like her and bloom like thee!
And foster there an infant tree,
To blush like her, and bloom like thee /] Original Κυτα/»ττο? h rtpuxoi «υ
m hwfu. Paeeeratius, upon the words “ cum castum amisit iiorem,” in the
nuptial song of Catullus, after explaining “ flos” in somewhat a similar
sense to that which Gaulminus attributes to pef»», says, “ Hortum quoque
vocant in quo flos ille carpitur, et Graecis xtnrn **■» to fptiCauov yuvaut»»."
May I remark, that the author of the Greek version of this charming
ode of Catullus, has negle&ed a most striking and Anacreontic beauty in
those verses " Ut flos in septis, &c.” which is the repetition of the line—
Multi illum pueri, multae optav£re puellae,
With the slight alteration of nulli and nullae. Catullus himself however,
has been equally injudicious in bis version of the famous ode of Sappho;
he has translated ytXuo-a; Ιμιροη, but takes no notice of iSv φΜ»<τας. Horace
has caught the spirit of it more faithfully—
I
Dulce ridentem Lalagen amabo
Dulce loquentem.
ODE LXVII.
GENTLE youth! whose looks assume
Such a soft and girlish bloom,
Why, repulsive, why refuse
The friendship which my heart pursues ?
Thou little know’st the soft controul,
With which thy virtue reins my soul 1
Then smile not on my locks of grey.;
Believe me, oft with converse gay,
I have formed this poem of three or four different fragments, which is a
liberty that perhaps may be justified by the example of Barnes, who has
thus compiled the fifty-seventh of his edition, and the little ode beginning
ftp' ΰίωρ, φιρ οίνον, ω iron, which he has subjoined to the epigrams. A literary
friend of mine (I hope brevi venturus in· ora) has translated in this man-
ner the remains of Sappho, Alcaeus, &c.
The fragments, combined in this ode, are the sixty-seventh, ninety-sixth,
ninety-seventh, and hundredth of Barnes’s edition, to which I refer the
reader for the names of the authors, by whom they are preserved.
I’ve chain’d the ears of tender age,
And boys have lov’d the prattling sage I
For mine is many a soothing pleasure,
And mine is many a soothing measure;
And much I hate the beamless mind,
Whose earthly vision, unrefin’d,
Nature has never form’d to see
The beauties of simplicity!
Simplicity, the flower of heaven,
To souls elect, by nature given I
And boys have lov*d the prattling sage /] Monsieur Chaulieu has given
a very amiable idea of an old man’s intercourse with youth—
Que cherchl par lee jeunes gene,
Four leure erreurs plein d’iodulgence,
Je tolere leur imprudence
£n faveur de leurs agrlmene.
ODE LXVI1I.
RlCH in bliss, I proudly scorn
The stream of Amalthea’s horn!
Nor should I ask to call the throne
Of the Tartessian prince my own;
To totter thro’ his train of years,
The victim of declining fears.
One little , hour of joy to me
Is worth a dull eternity!
This fragment is presetted in the third book of Strabo.
Of the Tartessian prince my own;] He here alludes to Arganthonius,
who lived, according to Lucian, an hundred and fifty years; and reigned,
according to Herodotus, eighty. See Barnes.
ODE LXIX.
NOW Neptune’s sullen month appears,
The angry night-cloud swells with tears;
And savage storms, infuriate driven,
Fly howling in the face of heaven !
Now, now, my friends, the gathering gloom
With roseate rays of wine illume:
And while our wreaths of parsley spread
Their fadeless foliage round our head,
We’ll hymn th’ almighty power of wine,
And shed libations on his shrine!
This is composed of two fragments; the seventieth and'eighty-first in
Barnes. They are both found in Eustathius.
ODE LXX.
THEY wove the lotus band to deck,
And fan with pensile wreath their neck;
And every guest to shade his head
Three little breathing chaplets spread;
Three fragments form this little ode, all of which are preserved in Athe-
naeus. They are the eighty-second, seventy-fifth, and eighty-third, in
Barnes.
And every guest to shade his head,
Three little breathing chaplets spread;] Longepierre, to give an idea of
the luxurious estimation, in which garlands were held by the ancients, re-
lates an anecdote of a courtezan, who, in order to gratify three lovers,
without leaving cause for jealousy with any of them, gave a kiss to one, let
the other drink after her, and put a garland on the brow of the third ; so
that each was satisfied with his favour, and flattered himself with the pre-
ference.
This circumstance is extremely like the subject of one of the tensons of
Savari de Mauleon, a Troubadour. See L’Histoire Litt£raire des Trouba-
dours. The recital is a curious picture of the puerile gallantries of chi-
valry.
And one was of Egyptian leaf,
The rest were roses, fair and brief!
While, from a golden vase profound,
To all on flowery beds around,
A goblet-nymph, of heavenly shape,
Pour’d the rich weepings of the grape!
ODE LXXI.
A BROKEN cake, with honey sweet,
* Is all my spare and simple treat,
And while a generous bowl I crown
To float my little banquet down,
I take the soft, the amorous lyre,
And sing of love’s delicious fire!
In mirthful measures, warm and free,
I sing, dear maid, and sing for thee 1
This poem is compiled by Barnes, from Athenaeus, Hephasstion, and
Arsenius. See Barnes, 80tb.
ODE LXXII.
WITH twenty chords my lyre is hung,
And while I wake them all for thee,
Thou, oh virgin, wild and young,
Disport’st in airy levity.
The nursling fawn, that in some shade
It’s antler’d mother leaves behind,
Is not more wantonly afraid,
More timid of the rustling wind 1
This I have formed from the eighty-fourth and eighty-fifth of Barnes's
edition. The two fragments are found in Athenaeus*
The nursling fawn, that in sonte shade
It's antler'd mother leaves behind, &cJ\ In the original·—
*0; i» ιίλη χιροκππκ
Ανολ»φθ«; pirrpof.
“ Homed” here, undoubtedly, seems a strange epithet j Madame Da-
cier however observes, that Sophocles, Callimachus, &c. have all applied it
in the very same manner, and she seems to agree in the conjecture of the
Scholiast upon Pindar, that perhaps horns are not always peculiar to the
males. I think we may with more ease conclude it to be a licence of the
poet—jussit habere puellam cornua.
ODE LXXIII.
FARE thee well, perfidious maid!
My soul too long on earth delay’d,
Delay’d, perfidious girl I by thee,
Is now on wing for liberty.
I fly to seek a kindlier sphere,
Since thou has ceas’d to love me here 1
This fragment is preserved by the scholiast upon Aristophanes, and is
the eighty>seventh in Barnes.
ODE LXXiy.
•
I BLOOM’D awhile, in happy flower,
’Till Love approach’d one fatal hour,
And made my tender branches feel
The wounds of his avenging steeL
Then, then I fell, like some poor willow
That tosses on the wintry billow I
# ^ ^
This is to be found in Hephaestian, and is the eighty-ninth of Barnes’s
edition.
I must here apologize for omitting a very considerable fragment imputed
to our poet—BeurSn ίΈνροιτυλιι ptXtt, tec. which is preserved in the twelfth
book of Athenaeus, and is the ninety-first in Barnes. If it was really Ana-
creon who wrote it, nil fuit unquam sic impar sibi. It is in a stile of
gross satire, and is full of expressions which never could be gracefully
translated.
ODE LXXV.
MONARCH Love I resistless boy,
With whom the rosy Queen of Joy,
And nymphs, that glance ethereal blue,
Disporting tread the mountain-dew;
Propitious, oh! receive my sighs,
Which, burning with entreaty, rise,
That thou wilt whisper to the breast
Of her I love thy soft behest;
And counsel her to learn from thee,
The lesson thou hast taught to me.
Ah ! if my heart no flattery tell,
Thou’lt own IVe learn’d that lesson well!
This fragment is preserved by Dion Chrysostom. Orat. ii. de Regno.
See Barnes^ 93.
ODE LXXVI.
SPIRIT of Love, whose tresses shine
Along the breeze, in golden twine ;
Come—within a fragrant cloud
Blushing with light, thy votary shroud ;
And, on those wings that sparkling play,
Waft, oh 1 waft me hence away 1
Love ! my soul is full of thee,
Alive to all thy luxury.
But she, the nymph for whom I glow,
The pretty Lesbian mocks my woe ;
This fragment, which is extant in Athenaeus (Barnes, 101), is supposed,
on the authority of Chamaeleon, to have been addressed to Sappho. We
have also some verses attributed to her, which are cited in the remarks
prefixed to this translation^ and which some romancers have supposed to
be her answer to Anacreon. K Mais par malheur (as Bayle says), Sappho
♦
vint au monde environ cent ou six vingt ans avant Anacreon.” Nouvelles
de la Rip. des Lett. tom. ii. de Novembre 1684.
Smiles at the hoar and silver’d hues,
Which Time upon my forehead strews—
Alas ! I fear she keeps her charms,.
In store for younger, happier arms t
ODE LXXVII.
HlTHER, gentle Muse of mine,
Come and teach thy votary old,
Many a golden hymn divine,
For the nymph with vest of gold.
Pretty nymph, of tender age,
Fair thy silky locks unfold;
listen to a hoary sage
Sweetest maid, with vest of gold!
This is formed of the 124th and 119th fragments in Barnes, both of
which are to be found in Scaliger’s Poetics.
ODE LXXVIII.
WOULD that I were a tuneful lyre,
Of burnish’d ivory fair;
Which, in the Dionysian choir,
Some blooming boy should bear.
Would that I were a golden vase,
And then some nymph should hold
My spotless frame, with blushing grace,
Herself as pure as gold!
This is generally inserted among the remains of Alcaeus. Some, how-
ever, have attributed it to Anacreon. See our poet’s twenty-second ode,
and the notes.
ODE LXXIX.
When Cupid sees my beard of snow,
Which blanching Time has taught to flow,
Upon his wing of golden light,
He passes with an eaglet’s flight,
And .flitting on he seems to say,
“JFare thee well—thou’st had thy day!”
See Barnes, 173d. This, fragment, to which I have taken the liberty of
adding a turn, not to be found in the original, is cited by Lucian in his
little essay on the gallic Hercules.
Cupid, whose lamp has lent the ray,
Which lightens our meandering way;
Cupid within my bosom stealing,
Excites a strange and mingled feeling,
Which pleases, though severely teasing,
And teases, tho* divinely pleasing!
Barnes, 125th. This, if I remember right, is in Scaliger’s Poetics. Gail
has omitted it in his collection of fragments.
LET me resign a wretched breath,
Since now remains to me,
No other balm than kindly death,
To soothe my misery!
This fragment is extant in Arsenius and Hephaestion. See Barnes (69th)
who has arranged the metre of it very elegantly.
I KNOW thou lov’st a brimming measure,
And art a kindly, cordial host;
But let me fill and drink at pleasure—
Thus I enjoy the goblet most.
Barnes, 7^d. This fragment, which is quoted by Athenaeus, is an excel-
lent lesson for the votaries of Jupiter Hospitalis.
I FEAR that love disturbs my breast,
Yet feel not love’s impassion’d care;
I think there’s madness in my breast,
Yet cannot find that madness there!
This fragment is in Hephsestion. See Barnes, Q5th.
Catullus expresses something of this contrariety of feelings—
Odi et amo—quare id faciam fortasse requiris ;
Nescio: sed fieri sentio, et excrucior.	Carm.	53.
I love thee and hate thee—but if I can tell
The cause of my love and my hate, may I die!
I can feel it, alas ! I can feel it too well,
That I love thee and hate thee, but cannot tell why.
me·
FROM dread Leucadia’s frowning steep,
Γ11 plunge into the whitening deep:
And there I’ll float, to waves resign’d—
For Love intoxicates my mind!
This also is in Hephaestion, and perhaps is a fragment of some poem, in
which Anacreon had commemorated the fate of Sappho. It is the 123d of
Barnes.
MIX me, child, a cup divine,
Chrystal water, ruby wine:
Weave the frontlet, richly flushing,
O’er my wint’ry temples blushing.
Mix the brimmer—Love and I
Shall no more the gauntlet try. ·
%
Here—upon this holy bowl,
I surrender all my soul!
This fragment is collected by Barnes from Demetrius Phalareus, and
Eustathius, and is subjoined in his edition to the epigrams attributed to our
poet. And here is the last of those little scattered flowers, which I thought
I	might venture with any grace to transplant. I wish it could be said of
the garland which they form T« αξ Αναχρηντος.
FINIS.
INDEX.