PREFACE.
The practice, which has lately been intro-
duced into literature, of writing very long
notes upon very indifferent verses, appears
to me rather a happy invention; for it sup-
plies us with a mode of turning stupid poetry
to account; and, as horses too dull for the
saddle may serve well enough to draw lum-
ber, so Poems of this kind make excellent
beasts of burden, and will bear notes, though
they may not bear reading. Besides, the
comments in such cases are so little under
the necessity of paying any servile deference
to the text, that they may even adopt that
Socratic dogma, “ Quod supra nos nihil
ad nos.”
In the first of the following Poems I have
ventured to speak of the Revolution in lan-
guage which has sometimes been employed by
Tory writers, and which is therefore neither
very new nor popular. But however an
Englishman may be reproached with ingra-
titude, for depreciating the merits and re-
sults of a measure, which he is taught to
regard as the source of his liberties—how-
ever ungrateful it might be in Alderman
B-rch to question for a moment the purity
of that glorious era, to which he is indebted
for the seasoning of so many orations—yet
an Irishman, who has none of these obli-
gations to acknowledge, to whose country
the Revolution brought nothing but injury
and insult, and who recollects that the book
of Molyneux was burned, by order of Wil-
liam’s Whig Parliament, for daring to ex-
tend to unfortunate Ireland those principles
on which the Revolution was professedly
founded, an Irishrtian may "venture to, cri-
ticise the measures of that period, without
exposing himself either to the imputation of
ingratitude, or the suspicion of being influ-
enced by any Popish remains of Jacobitism.
No nation, it is true, was ever blessed with
a-more golden opportunity of establishing
and securing its liberties for ever than the
conjuncture of Eighty-eight presented tp
the people of Great Britain. But the dis-
graceful reigns of Charles and James had
weakened and degraded the national cha-
racter. The bold notions of popular right,
which had arisen out of the struggles be-
tween Charles the First and his Parliament
were gradually supplanted by those slavish
doctrines for which Lord H-kesb-ry eulo-
gizes the churchmen of. that period; and as
the Reformation had happened too soon for
the purity of religion, so the Revolution
. came too late for the spirit of liberty.. Its
advantages accordingly were for the most
part specious and transitory, while ttie evils
which it entailed are still felt and still
increasing. .By rendering unnecessary the
frequent exercise of Prerogative, that un-
wieldy power which cannot move a step
. without alarm, it limited the only interfe-
rence of the Crown, which is singly and
independently exposed before the people,
and whose abuses are therefore obvious to
their senses and capacities; like the myrtle^
over a certain statue in Minerva’s temple at
Athens, it skilfully veiled from their sight
the only obtrusive feature of royalty. At
the same time however that the Revolution
abridged this unpopular attribute, it amply
compensated by the substitution of a new
power, as much more potent in its effect
as it is more secret in its operations. In the
disposal of an immense revenue and the
extensive patronage annexed to it, the first
foundations of this power of the Crown were
laid; the innovation of a standing army at
once iiicreased and strenghtened it, and the
few slight barriers which the Act of Settle-
ment opposed to its progress, have all been
gradually removed during the Whiggish
reigns that succeeded, till at length this
spirit of influence is become the vital prin-
ciple of the State, whose agency, subtle and
unseen, pervades every part of the Consti-
tution, lurks under all its forms and regu-
lates all its movements, and, like the invi-
sable sylph or grace which preside* over the
motions of beauty,
“ Illam, quicquid agtt, quoquo vestigia flectit, '
Componit furtim subsequiturque.”	.
The cause of Liberty and the Revolution
are so habitually associated by Englishmen,
that probably in objecting to the latter I
maybe thought hostile or indifferent to the
former; but nothing can be more unjust
than such a suspicion; the very object
which my humble animadversions would
attain is, that, in the crisis to Which I
think England is hastening, and between
which and foreign subjugation^ heimay soon
be compelled to choose, the errors and
omissions of 1688 may be remedied, and
that, as she then had a Revolution without
a Reform, she may now seek a Reform
without a Revolution.
In speaking of the parties which have so
long agitated England, it will be observed
that I lean as little to the "Whigs as to their
adversaries. Both factions have been equally
cruel to Ireland, and perhaps equally in-
sincere in their efforts for the liberties of
England. There is one name indeed, con-
nected with Whiggism, of which I can
never think but with veneration and tender-
ness. As justly, however, might the light
of the sun be claimed by any particular na-
tion, as the sanction of that name be as-
sumed by any party whatever; Mr. Fox
belonged to mankind, and they have lost in
him their ablest friend.
With respect to the few lines upon Into-
lerance which I have subjoined, they are
but the imperfect beginning of a long series
of Essays, with which I here menace my
readers, upon the same important subject.
I shall look to no higher merit in the task,
than that of giving a new form to claims
and remonstrances, which have often been
much more eloquently urged, and which
would long ere now have produced their
effect, but that the minds of some men,
like the pupil of the eye, contract them-
selves the more, the stronger light there is
shed upon them.
CORRUPTI ON:
3 $0tm.
Ni/f y ατανθ*	ωσπιρ	ιξ αγορας	txirsirfarcu ταντα9	αντ^σηκτα* $ι
am τ«τ«»,	υφ* coy	αίΓολωλε χα« νενοσηκίν η Ελλα?.	Ταντα £*ε$·ί
τ* j fuAoff,	ti τις	ειλτιφε η*	γιλ&>,- αν ομολογν*	cvyFtufxn τας
ιλΐγχορνοίς· /λ*<γο5-,	αν τβτο»;	τ*ί £9rmjua* ταλλα	τταντα, oVa ι*
. τβ λ>£ο}οχειν ηξτηται.
Dbmosth. Philipp, hi.
CORRUPTION,
AN EPISTLE,
&c. &c.
Boast on, my friend—though stript of all beside.
Thy struggling nation still retains her pride *:
That pride, which once in genuine glory woke,
When Marlborough fought and brilliant St. John
spoke,
- That pride, which still·, by time and shame un-
stung,
Outlives e’en Wh-tel-cke’s sword and H-wkes-
b’ry’s tongue!
*	Angli suos ac sua omnia impense mirantur; caeteras
nationes despectui habent.—Barclay (as quoted in one
of Dryden’s Prefaces).
Boast on, my friend, while in this humbled isle
Where honour mourns and freedom fears to
•	smiler
Where the bright light of England’s fame is
known
But by the baleful shadow she has thrown
On all our fate ^—where, doom’d to wrongs and
slights,	,
We hear you talk of Britain’s glorious rights,
*	England began very early to feel the effects of cruelty
towards her dependencies. “ The severity of her Go-
vernment (says Macpherson) contributed more to deprive
her of the continental dominions of the family of Planta-
genet than the arms of France.”—See his History,
vol. i. page 111.
f “ By the total reduction of the kingdom of Ireland
in 1691 (says Burke) the ruin of the native Irish, and in
a great measure too of the first races of the English, was
completely accomplished. The new English interest was
settled with as solid a stability as any thing in human af-
fairs can look for. All the penal laws of that unparalleled
code of oppression which were made after the last event
were manifestly the effects of national hatred and scorn
towards a conquered people, whom the victors delighted
to trample upon, and were not at all afraid to provoke.”
Yet
As weeping Slaves, that under hatches lie,
Hear those on deck extol the sun and sky !
Yet this is the era to which the wise Common Council
of Dublin refer us for “ invaluable blessings, &c.”
And this is the era which such Governors as His Grace
the Duke of R-chm-nd think it politic to commemo-
rate in the eyes of my insulted countrymen, by an an-
nual procession round the*»tatue of King Willi&m!
An unvarying trait of the policy of Great Britain towards
Ireland has been her selection of such men to govern us as
were least likely to deviate into justice and liberality, and the
alarm which she has taken when any conscientious Viceroy
has shewn symptoms of departure from the old code of pre-
judice and oppression. Our most favourite Governors have
accordingly been our shortest visitors, and the first moments
of their popularity have in general been the last of their
Government. Thus Sir Anthony Bellingham, after the
death of Henry the Eighth, was recalled “ for not suf-
ficiently consulting , the English interests,” or, in othe^
words, for not shooting the requisite quantity of wild
Irish. The same kind of delinquency led to the recall of
Sir John Perrot, in Elizabeth’s time, and to that of the
Earl of Radnor, in the reign of Charles the Second,
of whom Lord Orford says, “ We are not told how he
disappointed the Kings expectations, probably not by too
great complaisance, nor why his administration, which
Burnet calk just, wasdtfliketL If it is true, that he was
a	good
Boast on, while wandering through my native
haunts,
I coldly listen to thy patriot vaunts,
And feel, though dose our wedded countries twine,
More sorrow for my own than pride from thine.
Yet pause a moment—and if truths severe
Can find an inlet to that courtly ear
Which loves no politics in rhyme but P-e’s,
And hears no news but W -rd’s gazetted lies;
If aught can please thee but the good old saws
Of** Church and State,” and “ William’s match-
less laws,”
And ** Acts and Rights of glorious Eighty-eight,”
Things which, though now a century out of date,
Still serve to ballast, with convenient words,
A few crank arguments for speeching Lords.*.—
a good governor, the presumption will be that his rule
was not disliked by those to whom but from whom he
was sent.”—Royal and Noble Authors.
We are not without instances of the same illiberal po-
licy in our own times.
*	It never seems to occur to those orators and ad-
dressers who round off so many sentences and paragraphs
with
Turn, while I tell how England’s freedom found,
Where most she look’d for life, her deadliest
x wound;
How brave she struggled, while her foe was seen,
*	How faint, since Influence lent that foe a screen;
with the Bill of Rights, the Act of Settlement, &c. that
all the provisions which these Acts contained for the pre-
servation of parliamentary independence have been long
laid aside as romantic and troublesome. 'The Revolution,
as its greatest admirers acknowledge, was little more than
a recognition of ancient privileges, a restoration of that
old Gothic stmcture, which was brought from the
woods of Germany into England. Edward the First had
long before made a similar recognition, and had eveft
more expressly reverted to the first principles of the con-
stitution, by declaring that “ the people should have their
laws, liberties, and free customs as largely and wholly as
they have used tp have the same at any time they had
them/' But, luckily for the Crown and its interests, the
concessions both of Edward and of .William have been
equally vague and verbal, equally theoretical and insin-
cere. The feudal system was continued, notwithstanding
the former, and Lord M—’s honest head is upon his
shoulders, in spite of the latter. So that I confess I never
meet with a politician who seriously quotes the Declara-
tion of Rights, &c. to prove the actual existence of Eng*
lish
How strong o’er James and Popery she prevail’d,
How weakly fell, when Whigs and gold assail’d *.
lish liberty, that I do not think of the Marquis, whom
Montesquieu mentions *, who set about looking for mines
in the Pyrenees, upon the strength of authorities which he
had read in some ancient authors. The poor Marquis
toiled and searched in vain. He quoted his authorities to
the last, but he found no mines after all.	1
*	The chief, perhaps the only advantage which has re-
sulted from the system of influence, is the tranquil, unin-
terrupted flow which it has given to the administration of
Government. If Kings must be paramount in the State
(and their Ministers at least seem to think so), the coun-
try is indebted to the Revolution for enabling them to be-
come so quietly, and for removing so skilfully the danger
of those shocks and collisions which the alarming efforts
of prerogative never failed to produce.
It is the nature of a people in general to attend but to the
externals of Government. Having neither leisure or ability
to discuss its measures, they look no deeper than the sur-
face for their utility, and no farther than the present
for their consequences. Mrs. Macaulay has said of a cer-
tain period, " The people at this time were, as the people
of Great Britain always are, half-stupid, half-drunk, and
half-asleepand however we may dissent from this petu-
lant effusion of a Scotch-woman, it must be owned that
the
‘Liv.xxi.chap.il.
While Kings were poor, and all those schemes
unknown,
Which drain the People but enrich the Throne;
the reasoning powers of John Bull are not very easily
called into action, and that even where he does condescend
to exert them, it is like Dogberry’s display of his reading
and writing, “ where there is no need of such vanityas
upon that deep question about the dangers of the church,
which was submitted for his discussion by Mr. P-rc-v-1
at the late elections. It follows, however, from this apathy^
of the people, that as long as no glaring exertion of
power, no open violation of forms is obtruded upon them,
it is of very little consequence how matters are managed
behind the curtain ; and a few quiet men, getting close
to the ear of the Throne, may whisper away the salva-
tion of the country so inaudibly, that ruin will be divested
of half its alarming preparatives. If, in addition to this
slumber of the people, a great majority of those whom
they have deputed to watch for them, can be induced,
by any irresistible argument, to prefer the safety of the
government to the integrity of the constitution, and to
think a connivance at the encroachments of power less
troublesome than the difficulties which would follow reform,-
I cannot imagine a more tranquil state of affairs than must
necessarily result from such general and well-regulated·
acquiescence. Instead of vain and agitating efforts to
establish
Ere yet a yielding Commons had supplied
Those chains of gold by which themselves are
tied 
Then proud Prerogative, untaught to creep
With Bribery’s silent foot on Freedom’s sleep *,
establish that speculative balance of the constitution, which
perhaps has never existed but in the pages of Montesquieu *
and De Lolme, a preponderance would be silently yielded
to one of the three estates, which would carry the other
two almost insensibly but * effectually along with it; and
even though the path might lead eventually to destruction,
yet its specious and gilded smoothness would almost atone
for the danger—like Milton s bridge over Chaos, it would
lead	'
“ Smooth, easy, inoffensive, down to ******
*	Though the kings of England were most unroyally ha-
rassed and fettered in all their pursuits by pecuniary difli-
cultiee, before the provident'enactments of William’s reign
had opened to the Crown its present sources of wealth, yet
we must not attribute to the Revolutionary Whigs the
credit altogether of inventing this art of government. Itf*
advantages had long been understood by ministers and fa-
vourites,
*	Montesquieu seems not a little satisfied with his own
ingenuity in finding out the character of the English from
the nature of their political institutions ; but it appeara to me
somewhat like that easy sagacity, by which Lavater has disco-
ve/ed the genius of Shakespeare in his features*
Frankly avow’d his bold enslaving plan,
And claim’d a right from God to trample man !
But Luther’s light had too much warm’d mankind
For Hampden’s truths to linger long behind;
vourites, though the limits of the royal revenue prevented
them from exercising it with effect. In the reign of Mary
indeed the gold of Spain, being added to the usual re-
sources of the Throne, produced such a spirit of ductility
in her parliaments, that the price for which each member
had sold himself was publicly ascertained: and if Charles
the First could have commanded a similar supply, it is not
too much to suppose that the Commonwealth never would
have existed. But it was during the reign of the se-
cond Charles, that the nearest approaches were made
to that pecuniary system which our debt, our funds, and
our taxes, have since brought to such perfection; and
Clifford and Danby would not disgrace even the present
times of political venality. Still, however, the experiment
was but partial and imperfect *, and attended with scarcely
any other advantage than that of suggesting the uses to
which the power of the purse has been since converted,
just as the fulminating dust of the chemists may have pre-
pared the way for the invention of gunpowder.
•	See Preface to a Collection of Debate#,. &c. in 1694 and
1695, for an account of the public tables kept at Westminster,
in Charles the Second*s time, “ to feed the betrayers of their
country.” The payment of each day’s work was left under their
respective plates.
Nor then, when king-like Popes had &U’n so low,
Could pope-like Kings * escape the levelling blow.
That ponderous sceptre (in whose place we bow
To the light talisman of influence now),
Too gross, too visible to work the spell
Which modern Power performs, in fragments fell :
In fragments lay, till, patch’d and painted o’er
With fleurs-de-lys, it shone and scourg’d once
t -
more!
’Twas then, my friend, thy kneeling nation quaff’d
Long, long and deepthechurchman’sopiatedraught
Of tame Obedience—till her sense of right
And pulse of glory seem’d extinguish’d quite,
And Britons slept so sluggish in their chain,
That wak’ning Freedom call’d almost in vain I
Oh England! England! what a chance was thine,
When the last tyrant of that ill-starr’d line
*	The drivelling correspondence between James I. and
his “ dog Steenie” (the Duke of Buckingham), which
we find among the Hardwicke Papers, sufficiently shews,
if we wanted such illustration, into what doting, idiotic
brains the plan of arbitrary power may enter.
Fled from his sullied crown, and left thee free
To found thy own eternal liberty !
How bright, how glorious, in that sunshine hour,
Might patriot hands have rais’d the triple tower*
#	Tacitus has expressed his opinion, in a passage very
frequently quoted, that such a distribution of power as the
theory of the British constitution exhibits is merely a sub-
ject of bright speculation, “ a system more easily praised
than practised, and which, even could it happen to exist,
would certainly not prove permanentand, in truth, if
we reflect on the English history, we shall feel very much
inclined to agree with Tacitus. We shall find that at no
period whatever- has this balance of the three estates
existed; that the nobles predominated till the policy of
Henry VII. and his successor, reduced their weight by
breaking up the feudal system of property; that the power
of the Crown became then supreme and absolute, till the
bold encroachments of the Commons subverted the fabric
altogether; that the alternate ascendancy of prerogative
and privilege distracted the period which followed the
Restoration; and that, lastly, the Acts of 1688, by laying
the foundation, of an unbounded court-influence, have se-
cured a preponderance to the Throne which every succeed-
ing year increases. So that the British constitution has
pever perhaps existed but in theory,
Of British freedom on a rock divine,
Which neither force could storm nor treachery
mine!
But no—-the luminous, the lofty plan,
Like mighty Babel, seem’d too bold for man ;
The curse of jarring tongues again was given
To thwart a work that rais’d men near to heaven!
While Tories marr’d what Whigs had scarce be-
gun *,
While Whigs undid what Whigs themselves had
done-f-,	.
·* “ Those two thieves (says Ralph) between whom
the nation was crucified.”·—Use and Abuse of Parliaments,
page 164.
f The monarchs of Great Britain can never be suffi-
ciently grateful for that generous spirit which led the Revo-
lutionary Whigs to give away the crown, without imposing
any of those restraints or stipulations, which other men
might have taken advantage of such a moment to enforce,
and in framing of which they had so good a model to
follow as the limitations proposed by the Lords Essex
and Halifax in the debate upon the Exclusion Bill.
They not only condescended however to accept of places,
but
The time was lost, and William, with a smile,
Saw Freedom weeping o’er th’ unfinished pile!
but they took care that these dignities should be no im-
pediment to their “ voice potential ” in affairs of legisla-
tion; and though an Act was after many years suffered to
pass, which by one of its articles disqualified placemen
from serving as members of the House of Commons, yet
it was not allowed to interfere with the influence of the
reigning monarch, nor indeed with that of his successor
Anne, as the purifying clause was not tp take effect till
after the decease of the latter sovereign, and she veiy con-
siderately repealed it altogether. So that, as representa-
tion has continued ever since, if the King were simple
enough to send to foreign courts ambassadors who were
most of them in the pay of those courts, he would be just
as faithfully represented as his people. It would be endless
to enumerate all the favours which wore conferred upon
William by those “ apostate Whigs.” They complimented
him with the first suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act,
which had been hazarded since the confirmation of that pri-
vilege; and this example of our Deliverer’s reign has not
been lost upon any of his successors. They promoted the
establishment of a standing army, and circulated in its de-
fence the celebrated “ Balancing Letter,” in which it is in-
sinuated that England, even then, in her boasted hour of
regeneration, was arrived at such a pitch of faction and
corruption, that nothing could keep her in order but a
Whig
Hence all the ills you suffer, hence remain
Such galling fragments of that feudal chain
Whig ministry and a standing army. They refused, as
long as tirey could, to shorten the duration of Parliaments;
and though the Declaration of Rights acknowledged the
necessity of such a reform, they were able, by arts not
unknown to modern ministers, to brand those as traitors
and republicans who urged it *. But the grand and dis-
tinguishing trait of their measures was the power which
they gave to the Crown of annihilating the freedom of
elections, of muddying for ever that stream of repre-
sentation, which had, even in the most agitated times,
reflected some features of the people, but which then, for
the first time, became the Pactolus of the court, and grew
so darkened with sands of gold, that it served for the
people’s mirror no longer. We need but consult the
writings of that time, to understand the astonishment then
^excited by measures, which the practice of a century has
rendered not only familiar but necessary. See a pamphlet
called “ The Danger of mercenary Parliaments,” 1698;
State Tracts, Will. III. vol. ii. p. 638; and see also
“ Some Paradoxes presented as a New Year’s Gift”
(State Poems, vol. iii. p. 527)·
*	See a Pamphlet published in 1693, upon the King’s re-
fusing to sign the Triennial Bill, called “ A Discourse between
a Yeoman of Kent and a Knight of a Shire."—“ Hereupon
(says the Yeoman) the gentleman grew angry, and said that
I talked like a base commons-wealth man."
Whose links, around you by the Norman flung,
Though loos’d and broke so often, still have clung.
#* The last great wound given to the feudal system was
the Act of the 12th of Charles II. which abolished the
tenure of knight’s service in capite, and which Blackstone
compares, for its salutary influence upon property, to
the boasted provisions of Magna Charta itself. Yet even in
this Act we see the effects of that counteracting spirit, that
Arimanius, which has weakened every effort of the.English
nation towards liberty, which allowed but half the errors of
Popery to be removed at the Reformation, and which
planted more abuses than it suffered to be rooted out at
the Revolution. The exclusion of copyholders from their
share of elective rights was permitted to remain as a brand
of feudal servitude, and as an obstacle to the rise of that
strong counterbalance which an equal representation of
property would oppose to the weight of the Crown. If
the managers of the Revolution had been sincere in their
wishes for reform, they would not only have taken this
fetter off the rights of election, but they would have re-
newed the mode adopted in Cromwell’s time of increasing,
the number of knights of the shire, to the exclusion of
those rotten insignificant boroughs, which have tainted the
whole mass of the constitution. Lord Clarendon calls
this measure of Cromwell’s " an alteration fit to be more
warrantably made, and in a better time.” It formed part
of
Hence sly Prerogative, like Jove of old,
Has turn’d his thunder into showers of gold,
Whose silent courtship wins securer joys *,
Taints by degrees, and ruins without noise·
of Mr. Pitt’s plan in 1783 ; but Mr. Pitt’s plan of reform
was a kind of dramatic piece, about as likely to be acted
as Mr. Sheridan’s “ Foresters.0	·
*	— ■ fore enim tutum iter et patens
Converso in pretium Deo.
Aurum per medios ire satellites,
Et perrumpere amat saxa, potentius
Ictu fulmineo.
Hokat. lib. iii. od. 1C.
The Athenians considered seduction so much more dan-
gerous than force, that the penalty for a rape was merely
a pecuniary fine, while the guilt of seduction was punished
with death. And though it must be owned that, during
the reign of that ravisher Prerogative, the poor Constitu-
tion was treated like Miss Cunegund among the Bulgarians;
yet I agree with the principle of the Athenian law, that
her present state of willing self-abandonment is much more
hopeless and irreclaimable, and calls for a more signal
vengeance upon her seducers. *
It would be amusing to trace the history of Prerogative
from the date of its strength under the Tudor princes,
	when	^
While Parliaments, no more those sacred things
Which make and rule the destiny of Kings,
when Henry VII. and his successors “ taught the people
(as Nathaniel Bacon saysx) to dance to the tune of Alle-
giance” to the period of the Revolution, when the Throne,
in its attacks upon liberty, began to exchange the noisy
explosions of Prerogative for the silent and effectual air-
gun of Influence. In considering it too since that memo-
rable era, we shall find that, while the royal power has
been abridged in branches where it .might be made con-
ducive to the interests of the people, it has been left in
full and unshackled vigour against almost every point
where the integrity of the constitution is vulnerable. For
instance> the power of chartering boroughs, to whose ca-
pricious abuse in the hands of the Stuarts we are in-
debted for most of the present anomalies of representation,
might, if suffered to remain, have in some degree atoned
for ks mischief by restoring the old unchartered boroughs
to their rights, and widening more equally the basis of the
legislature. But, by the Act of Union with Scotland,
this part of the prerogative was removed, lest Liberty
should have a chance of being healed even by the rust of
the spear which had wounded her. The power, how-
ever, of creating peers, which has generally been exer-
} Historic, and Politic. Discourse, &c. part ii. p, 114.
&	cised
Like loaded dice by ministers are thrown,
And each new set of sharpers cog their own!
Hence the rich oil, that from the Treasury steals,
And drips o’er all the Constitution’s wheels,
cised for the government against the constitution, is left iu
free, unqualified activity; notwithstanding the example of
that celebrated Bill for the limitation of this ever-budding
branch of prerogative, which was proposed in the reign
of George I. under the peculiar sanction and recommend-
ation of the Court, but which the Whigs rejected with
that characteristic dclicacy, which has generally prevented
them, when in office themselves, from taking any un-
courtly advantage of the Throne. It will be recollected,
however, that the creation of the twelve peers by the Tories
in Anne’s reign (a measure which Swift, like a true party-
man, defends) gave these upright Whigs all possible
alarm for their liberties.
With regard to this generous fit about his prerogative wliich
seized the good Kiug George I. historians have said that
the paroxysm originated more in hatred to his son than hi
love to the constitution1; but no person, acquainted with
the annals of the three Georges, could possibly suspect
any one of those gracious Monarchs either of ill-will to
his heir, or indifference for the constitution.
1 Coxe says that this Bill was projected by Sunderland·
Giving the old machine such pliant play*,
That Court and Commons jog one joltless way,
While wisdom trembles for the crazy car
So gilt, so rotten, carrying fools so far!
And the dup’d people, hourly doom'd to pay
The sums that bribe their liberties away -f·,
*	“ They drove so fast (says Wei wood of the ministers
of Charles I.), that it was no wonder that the wheels and
chariot broke.” (Memoirs, p. 35.)—Cut this fatal acci*
dent, if w e may judge from experience, is to be imputed
less to the folly and impetuosity of the drivers, than to the
want of that suppling oil from the Treasury, which has
been found so necessary to make a government like that
of England run smoothly. If Charles had been as well
provided with this article as his successors have been since
the happy Revolution, his Commons would never have
merited from the Throne the harsh app^hation of “ sedi-
tious vipers,” but would have been (as they are now, and
I trust always will be) “ dutiful Commons,”—<c loyal
Commons,” &c. Sec. and would have given him ship-
money, or any other sort of money he might take a fancy
to.
'f The period that immediately succeeds a coronation
has been called very aptly the Honey-nioon of a reign;
and if we jmppose the Throue to be the wife, and the
D %	People
Like a young eagle, who has lent his plume
To fledge the shaft by which he meets his doom,
People the husbandx, I know no better model of a ma-
trimonial transaction, nor one that I would sooner recom-
mend to a woman of spirit, than that which the arrange-
ments of l688 afford. In the first place, she must not
only obtain from her husband an allowance of pin-money
or civil-list establishment, sufficient to render her inde-
pendent of his caprice, but she must also prevail on him
to make her the steward of his estates, and to intrust her
with the management of all his pecuniary concerns, I
need not tell a woman of sense to what spirited uses she
may turn such concessions. He will soon become so tame
and docile under her hands, that she may make him play
the strangest and most amusing tricks, such as quarrelling
with his nearest and dearest relations about a dish of
tea*, a turban3, or a wafer4; preparing his house for
defence against jobbers, by putting fetters and handcuffs
on two thirds of its inmates; employing C-nn—g and
P-rc-v-1 in his sickest moments to read to him alternately
1 This is contrary to the symbolical language of prophecy,
in which (according to Sir Isaac Newton) the King is the
husband, and the People the wife. See Faber on the Pro-
phecies.—I would beg leave to suggest to Mr. Faber, that his
friend Sir R-ch—d M-sgr-ve can, in his own proper person,
supply him with an exposition of “ the Horns of the Beast/.’
*	America.	3	India.	4	Ireland.
Joe
See their own feathers pluck’d, to wing the dart
Which rank corruption destines for their heart!
Joe Miller and the Catechism, with a thousand other di-
verting inconsistencies. If her spouse have still enough
of geqse remaining to grumble at the ridiculous exhibition
which she makes of him, let her withhold frorn him now
and then the rights of the Habeas Corpus Act (a mode of
proceeding which the women of Athens once adopted *),
and if the good man loves such privileges, the interruption
will soon restore him to submission. If his former wife
w ere a Papist, or had any tendency that way, I would
advise my fair Sovereign, whenever he begins to argue
with her unpleasantly, to shout out “ No Popery, no
Popery!” as loud as she can, into his ears, and it is
astonishing what an effect it will have in disconcerting all
his arguments. This method was tried lately by an old
woman at Northampton, and with much success.^—Seri-
ously, this convenient bugbear of Popery is by no means
the least among the numberless auxiliaries which the Re-
volution has marshalled on the side of the Throne.—Those
unskilful tyrants Charles and James, instead of pro-
fiting wisely by that useful subserviency, which has always
1	See the Lysistrata of Aristophanes.—The following is the
form of suspension, as he gives it:
*Ow; αν «νηρ νττιτυφη
ΙκασΛ τ ctvfyi tu -τέκτονα».
distinguished
But soft! my friend—I hear thee proudly say,
" What! shall I listen to the impious lay,·
^distinguished the ministers of our religious establishment,
were blind enough to plan the ruin of this best bul-
wark of their power, and connected their designs
upon the Church so closely with their attacks upon tlie
Constitution, that they identified in the minds of the
people the interests of their religion and their liberties.
During those times, therefore, “ No Popery” was the
watch-word of freedom, and served to keep the public
•pirit awake against the invasions of bigotry and prero-
gative. The Revolution, however, by removing this ob-
ject of jealousy, has produced a reliance on the orthodoxy
of the Throne, of which the Throne has not failed to
take every possible advantage, and the cry of “ No
Popery” having, by this means, lost its power of alarm-
ing the people pgainst the encroachments of the Crown,
has served ever since the very different purpose of strengthen·.·
ing the Crown against the claims and struggles of the people.
The danger of the Church froni Papists and Pretenders
was the chief pretext for the repeal of the Triennial Bill,
for the adoption of a standing army, for the numerous
suspensions of the Habeas Corpus Act, and in short for
all those spirited infractions of the constitution by which
the reigns of the last century were so eminently distin-
guished· We have seen too very lately how the same
3carecrow
fC That dares, with Tory license, to profane
“ The bright bequests of William’s glorious reign ?
“ Shall the great wisdom of our patriot sires,
“ Whom H-wke-b—y quotes and savoury B-rch
admires,
“ Be slander’d thus ? shall honest St—le agree
if With virtuous R—se to call us pure and free,
“ Yet fail to prove it ? Shall our patent pair
“ Of wise State-Poets waste their words in air,
“ AndPye unheeded breathe his prosp’rous strain,
“ And C-nn-g take the people's sense in vain * ?”
scarecrow alarm lias enabled the Throne to select its mi-
nisters from men, whose servility is their only claim
to elevation, and who are pledged (if such an alternative
could arise) to take part with the scruples of the King
against the salvation of the empire.
*	Somebody has said, “ Quand tous les Poetes seroient
. . ·
noyes, ce ne seroient mie grande dommage but I am
aware that this would be most uncivil language at i^tiine
when our birth-day odes and state-papers are written by
such pretty poets as Mr. P-e and Mr. C-nn-g. I can assure
the latter too that I think him (like his water-proof col-
league Lord C-stl-r-gh) reserved for a very different fate
from that which the author I have just quoted imagines for
2	his
The people !—*ah ! that Freedom’s form should
stay
Where Freedom’s Spirit long hath pass’d away !
That a false smile should play around the dead,
And flush the features, where the soul has fled*!
When Rome had lost her virtue with her rights,
When her foul tyrant sat on Capreae’s heights
his poetical fraternity. AH I wish is, that he would
change places with his brother P-e, by which means we
should have somewhat less prose in our odes, and certainly
less poetry in our politics.
*	“ It is a scandal (said Sir Charles Sedley in William's
reign) that a Government so sick at heart as ours is should
look so well in the face ” and £dmund Burke lias said,
in the present reign, “ When the people conceive that
laws and tribunals, and even popular assemblies, are per·
verted from the ends of their institution, they find in these
names of degenerated establishments only new motives to
discontent. Tkose bodies which, when full of life and
beauty, lay in their arms aqd were their joy and comfort,
wheS dead and putrid become more loathsome from re*
membranee of former endearments.”—Thoughts on the
present Discontents, 1770.
+...............Tutor haberi
Principis, August^ Caprearum in rupe sedentis
Cum grege Chaldaeo. Juvenal Sat. x. v. 92.
The Senate still continued during the reign of Tiberius
to
Amid his ruffian spies, and doom’d to death
Each noble name they blasted with their breath I
Ev’n then, (in mockery of that golden time,
When the Republic rose rever’d, sublime,
And her free sons, diffused from zone to zone,
Gave kings to every country but their own,)
Ev’n then the Senate and the Tribunes stood,
Insulting marks, to shew how Freedom’s flood
Had dar’d to flo\V, in glory’s radiant day,
And how it ebb’d, for ever ebb’d away *!
to manage all the business of the public; the money
was then and. long after coined by their authority, and
every other public affair received their sanction*
We are told by Tacitus of a certain race of men, who
were particularly useful to the Roman Emperors \ they
were called M instrumenta regni,” or “ Court Tools,”
from which it appears, that My Lords M-lgr-ve, Ch-th-m,
&c. 8tc. are by no means things of modern invention.
#	There is something very touching in what Tacitus
tells us of the hopes that revived in a few patriot bosoms,
when the death of Augustus was near approaching, and
die fond expectation with which they began “ bona liber-
tatis incassum disserere.”
Ferguson says, that Caesar’s interference with the rights
S	ef
Oh ! look around—though yet a tyrant’s sword
Nor haunts your sleep nor trembles o’er your board,
Though blood be better drawn by modern quacks
With Treasury leeches than with sword or axe,
Yet say, could ev’n a prostrate Tribune’s power,
Or a mock Senate in Rosie’s servile hour,
Insult so much the rights, the claims of man,
As doth that fetter’d mob, that free divan,
Of noble tools and honourable knaves,
Of pension’d patriots and privileg’d slaves !
That party-colour’d mass, which nought can
warm
But quick Corruption’s heat—whose ready swarm
Spread their light wings in Bribery’s golden sky,
Buz for a period, lay their eggs and die!
That greedy vampire, which from Freedom’s tomb
Comes forth, with all the mimicry of bloom
/
Upon its lifeless cheek, and sucks and drains
A people’s blood to feed its putrid veins Ι-
οί election “ made the subversion of the Republic more
felt than any of the former acts of his power ."-—Roman
Republic, book v. chap. 1.
“ Heavens, what a picture!”—yes, my friend,
9Us dark—
€ζ But can no light be found, no genuine spark
“ Of former fire to warm us ? Is there none
“ To act a Marvell’s part * ?”—I fear, not one.
To place and power all public spirit tends,
In place and power all public spirit ends ^;
#	Andrew Marvell, the honest opposer of the court
during the reign of Charles the Second, aud the last
Member of Parliament who, according to the ancieqt
mode, took wages from his constituents. How very
much the Commons have changed their pay-masters !—
See the State-Poems for some rude but spirited effusions
of Andrew Marvell·
ή- The following artless speech of Sir Francis Winnington,
in the reign of Charles the Second, will amuse those who
are fully aware of the perfection which we havq attained
in that system of Government whose humble beginnings
seem to have astonished the worthy Baronet so.much,
“ I did observe (says he) that all those who had pensions,
and most of those who had offices, voted all of a side as
they were directed by some great officer, exactly as if
their business in this House had been to preserve their
pensions and offices, and not to make laws for the good
of them who sent them hfcre.”-*-He alludes to that Par*
¥ 2	liament
Like hardy plants, that love the air and sky,
When out’t will thrive, but taken in’t will die!
Not bolder truths of sacred Freedom hung
From Sidney’s pen or burn’d on Fox’s tongue,
Than upstart Whigs produce each market-night,
While yet their conscience as their purse is light;
While debts at home excite their care for those
Which, dire to tell, their much-lov’d country
owes,
And: loud and upright, till their price be known,
They thwart the King’s supplies to raise their own—
But bees, on flowers alighting, cease their hum,
So, settling upon places, Whigs grow dumb !
And, though I feel as if indignant Heaven
Must think that wretch too foul to be forgiven,
Who basely hangs the bright, protecting shade
Of Freedom’s ensign o’er Corruption’s trade *,
liament which was called, par excellence, the Pensionary
Parliament! a distinction, however, which it has long
lost, and which we merely give it from old custom, just as
we say The Irish Rebellion.
*	*? While they promise them liberty, they themselves
are the servants of corruption.” 2 Pet. ii·-—I suggest with
much
And makes the sacred flag he dares to shew
His passport to the market of her foe !—
Yet, yet, I own, so venerably dear
Are Freedom’s grave old anthems to my ear,
That I enjoy them, though by rascals sung,
And reverence Scripture ev’n from Satan’s tongue*
Nay, when the Constitution has expir’d,
I ’11 have such men, like Irish wakers, hir’d
To sing old Habeas Corpus by its side,
And ask, in purchas’d ditties, why it died * ?
much deference to the expounders of Scripture-prophecy,
whether Mr. C-nn-ng is not at present fulfilling the pre-
diction of “ the scoffers,” who were to come u in the
last days,”
#	J believe it is in following the corpse to the grave,
and not at the wakes (as we call the watching of the dead),
that this elegiac howl of my countrymen is performed,
Spenser says, that our howl “ is heathenish, and proceeds
from-a despair of salvation/’ If so, I think England may
join in chorus with us at present.-—The Abbe de Mo·
traye tells us, that the Jews in the East address their dead
in a similar manner, and say, “ Hu ! Hu! Hu! why did
you die ? Hadn’t you a wife? Hadn’t you a long piper”
&c. &c. (See his Travels.) I thought for a long time
.	.	*	'	with
so
See that smooth Lord, whom nature^ plastic
pains
Seem to have destin’d for those Eastern reigns
When eunuchs flourish’d, and when nerveless
things
That men rejected were the chos’n of Kings *.
Ev’n he forsooth (oh mockery accurst!)
Dar’d to assume the patriot’s name at first—^
with Vallancey, that we were a colony of Carthaginians,
but from this passage of De Motraye, and from the way
in which Mr. P-rc-v-1 would have us treated, I begin to
suspect we are no better than Jews.
*	According to Xenophon, the chief circumstance
which recommended eunuchs to the service of Eastern
princes, was the ignominious station which they held in
society, and the probability of their being, upon this ac-
count, more devoted to the will and caprice of a master,
from whose notice alone they derived consideration, and in
whose favour they found a refuge from the contempt of
mankind. Aiofot omj o* ti»&χοι «rape* τοίζ άλλοι; αν$ςνπο^ ΧΟΗ
ii* raro hnrora tvixypu *σ$οσ&οντα» ’ .—But I doubt whether
even an Eastern Prince would have chosen an entire Ad-
ministration upon this principle.
+ Does Lord C-stl-r-gh remember the Reforming Re-
solutions of his early days ?
! See a pamphlet on thg Union, by “ a Philosopher.'*
Thu$ Pitt began, and thus begin his apes; v
Thus devils, when first rais’d, take pleasing
shapes*—
But, oh poor Ireland! if revenge be sweet
For centuries of wrong, for dark deceit
And withering insult—for the Union thrown
Into thy bittei; cup *, when that alone
Of slavery’s draught was wanting -j—if for this
Revenge be sweet, thou hast that daemon’s bliss;
f “ And in the cup an Union shall be thrown.”
.	Hamlet.
Three C’s were branded in the Sibylline books as fatal
to the peace and liberties of Rome. T^a x&wa xaxir*»
(Cornelius Sylla, Cornelius Cinna, and Cornelius Len-
tulus *). And three C’s will be remembered in Ireland
as long as C-m-d-n and cruelty, Cl-re and corruption,
C-stl-r-gh and contempt, are alliteratively and appropri-
ately associated.
f Among the many measures which, since the Revolution,
have contributed to increase the influence of the Throne,
*nd to feed up this “ Aaron’s serpent” of the constitution
to its present healthy and respectable magnitude, there
have
•	See a treatise byPontui DeThiard, “ De recta Nominum
Impositione/* p. 43.
For oh! *tis more than hell's revenge to see
That England trusts the men who *ve ruin’d thee f
That in these awful days, when every hour
Creates some new or blasts some ancient power,
have been few more nutritive than the Scotch and Irish
Unions. Sir John Packer said, in a debate upon the
former question, that “ he would submit it to the House,
whether men who had basely betrayed their trust by giving
up their independent constitution, were fit to be admitted
into the English House of Commons.” But Sir John
would have known, if he had not been out of place at the
time, that the pliancy of such materials was not among the
least of their recommendations. Indeed the promoters of
the Scotch Union w ere by no means disappointed in the
leading object of their measure, for the triumphant majorities
of the Court-party in Parliament may be dated from the
admission of the 45 and the 16. Once or twice upon the al-
teration of their law of treason and the imposition of die
malt-tax (measures, which were in direct violation of the
Act of Union) these worthy North Britons arrayed
themselves in opposition to the Court; but /hiding this
effort for their countiy unavailing, they prudently deter*
mined to think thenceforward of themselves, and few men
have kept to a laudable resolution more firmly.—The ef-
fect of Irish representation upon the liberties of England
will be no less perceptible and no less permanent.
C	Ovi
When proud Napoleon, like the burning shield *
Whose light compelled each wondering foe to yield,
With baleful lustre blinds the brave and free,
And dazzles Europe into slavery!
<· 1 .—1	'· - ■
........Oui’ oyi ΤΑΤΡΟΤ
Auvtrcu ΑΝΤΕΛΛΟΝΤΟΣ
Hie infusion of such cheap and useful ingredients as my
Lord L-m-r-ck, Mr. D-nn-s Br-wne, See. &c. into the
Legislature must act as a powerful alterative on the Consti-
tution, and clear it by degrees of aU the troublesome hu-
mours of honesty.
#	The magician’s shield in Ariosto
Έ tolto per vertu dello splendore , *
La libertate a loro. Cant. 2.
We are told that Caesar’s code of morality was contained
in the following lines of Euripides* which that great man
Veiy frequently repeated:
Eurip yap ctSmuv χξΐι τυρατν*$*ς
Κάλλιο? ai/xiin* ταλλα ^'νυσιβίη χξΜ·
This appears to be also the moral code of Bonaparte·
1 Ftom Aratus (v. 715) > a poet, who wrote upon astro-
nomy, though, as Cicero assures us, he knew nothing whatever
about the subject—-just as the great Harvey wrote ,€ De
Generatione,” though he had as little to do with the matter as
my Lord Viscount C.
That, in this hour, when patriot zeal should
guide,
When Mind should rule, and—Fox should not
have died, .
All, that devoted England can oppose	_
To enemies made fiends and friends made foes,
Is the rank refuse, the despis’d remains·*
Of that unpityjng power, whose whips and chains
#	When the Duke of Buckingham was assassinated,
Charles the First, as a tribute to his memory, continued
all his creatures in the same posts and favours which the;
had enjoyed under their patron; and much in the same
manner do we see the country sacrificed to the manes of
a Minister at present.
It is invidious perhaps to look for parallels in the reign of
Charles the First, but the expedient of threatening the-
Commons with dissolution which has lately been played off
with so much eclat, appears to have been frequently re-
sorted to at that period. In one instance Hume tells os,
that the King sent his Lord Keeper (not his Jester) to
menace the House, that unless they dispatched a certain
Bill for subsidies, they must expect to sit no longer. By
similar threats the excise upon beer and ale w as carried in
Charles the Second’s reign. It is edifying to know that
though Mr. C-nn-g despises Puffendorf, he has no objection
to precedents derived from the Courts of the Stuarts·
Made Ireland first, in wild, adulterous trance,
Turn false to England's bed and whore with
France!—*
Those hack’d and tainted tools, so foully fit
For the grand artizan of mischief P-tt,
So useless ever but in vile employ,
So weak to save, so vigorous to destroy !
Such are the men that guard thy threaten’d shore,
Oh England! sinking England * Γ boast no
more.
*	The following prophetic remarks occur, in a letter
written by Sir Robert Talbot, who attended the Duke of
Bedford to Paris in 1762. Talking of states which have
grown powerful in commerce, he says, “ According to the
nature and common course of things there is a confederacy
against them, and consequently in the same proportion
as they increase in riches, they approach to destruction.
The address of our King William in making all Europe
take the alarm at France has brought that country before
us near that inevitable period. We must necessarily have
our tuni, and Great Britain will attain it as soon as France
shall have a declaimer with organs as proper for that po-
litical purpose as were those of our William the Third.
. *..........Without doubt, my Lord, Great Britain
y 3	must
must lower her flight. Europe will remind us of the
balance of commerce as she has reminded France of the
balance of power. The address of our statesmen will
immortalize them by contriving for us a descent which
shall not b^ a fall, by making us rather resemble Holland
than Carthage and Venice”— Letters on the French
Nation.	'
END OF THE POEM ON CO*RUFTIO!C.
INTOLERANCE
PART THE FIRST.
4f This clamour, which pretends to be raised for the safety of Religion,
has almost worn out the very appearance of it, and rendered us not only
the most divided but the most immoral people upon the face of the
earth.”
#	,	Abbisok,	Freeholder,	No.	37.
%
INTOLERANCE,
&C.&C.
Start not, my Friend, nor think the Muse will
stain
Her classic fingers with the dust profane
Of Bulls, Decrees, and fulminating scrolls,
That took such freedom once witii royal souls*,
*	The king-deposing doctrine, notwithstanding its many
mischievous absurdities, was of no little service to the
cause of political liberty, by inculcating the right of re-
sistance to tyrants, and asselting the will of the people to
be the only true fountain of power. Bellarmine, the most
violent of the advocates for papal authority, was one of
the first to maintain (see De Pontif. lib. i. cap. 7),
“ That Kings have not their authority or office immedi-
ately from God nor his law, but only from the law of
nations;* and in King James’s “ Defence of the Rights
of Kings against Cardinal Perron,” we find His Majesty
expressing strong indignation against the Cardinal for
having asserted “ that'to the deposing of a King the con-
4	sent
When Heaven was yet the Pope’s exclusive trade*
And Kings were damn'd as fast as now they ’re
made /
sent of the people must be obtained”-»** for by theft
words (says James) the people are exalted above the Kin$
and made the judges of the King’s deposing·* P. 4£4.—
Even in Mariana’s celebrated book, where the nonsense
of bigotry does not interfere, there are some liberal and
enlightened ideas of government, of the restraints which
should be imposed upon Royal power, of the subordina-
tion of the Throne to the interests of the people, &c. &C»
(De Rege et Regis Institutione. See particularly lib· i.
cap. 6. 8, and 9·)—It is rather remarkable too, that Eng-
land should be indebted to another Jesuit, for the earliest
defence of that principle upon which the Revolution was
founded, namely, the right of the people change the
succession. (See Doleman’s u Conferences,” written in
support of the title of the Infanta of Spam against that
of James I.)—When Englishmen, therefore, say that
Popery is the religion of slavery, they should not only
recollect that their boasted Constitution is the work and
bequest of Popish ancestors; they should not only re·
member the laws of Edward IIL “ under whom (says
Bolingbroke) the^ constitution of our Parliaments, and
the whole form of our Government, became reduced into
better
No, no—let D—gen-n search the Papal chair*
For fragrant treasures long forgotten there,
better formbut they should know that even the errors
of Popery have leaned to the cause of liberty, and that
Papists, however mistaken their motives may have been,
were the first promulgators of the doctrines which led to
the Revolution.—But, in truth, the political principles of
the Roman Catholics have generally been made to suit the
convenience of their oppressors, and they have been re-
presented alternately as slavish or refractory, according as
a pretext for tormenting them was wanting. Th6 same
inconsistency has marked every other imputation against
diem. They are charged with laxity in the observance of
oaths, though an oath has been found sufficient to shut
them from all worldly advantages. If they reject some
decisions of their church, they are said to be sceptics and
bad Christians; if they admit those very decisions, they
are branded as bigots and bad subjects. We are told
that confidence and kindness will make them enemies to
the Government, though we know that exclusion and in-
juries have with difficulty prevented them from being its
friends. In short, nothing can better illustrate the misery
of those shifts and evasions by which a long course of
cowardly injustice must be supported, than the whole
history of Great Britain’s conduct towards the Catholic
part of her empire.
*	The " Sella Stercoraria ” of the Popes.—The Right
Q	Honourable
And as the witch of sunless Lapland thinks
That little swarthy gnomes delight in stinks,
Let sallow P-rc-v-1 snuff up the gale,
Which wizard D—gen-n’s gather’d sweets exhale!
Enough for me, whose heart has leam’d to scorn
Bigots alike in Rome or England born,
Who lothe the venom, whencesoe’er it springs,
From Popes or Lawyers *, Pastry-cooks or Kings»
Enough for me to laugh and weep by turns,
As mirth provokes, or indignation burns,
As C-nn—-g vapours, or as France succeeds,
As H-wk-sb’ry proses, or as Ireland bleeds!
Honourable and learned Doctor will find an engraving of
this chair in Spanheim’s “ Disquisitio'Historica de Papi
Foemina” (p. 118); and I recommend it as a model for thfr
fashion of that seat which the Doctor is about to take in
the P; ;Vy-Council of Ireland.	,
*	When Innocent X. was entreated to decide the con-
troversy between the Jesuits and the Jansenists, he an-
swered, that “ he had been bred a lawyer, and had
therefore nothing to do with divinity.”—-It were to be
wished that some of our English pettifoggers knew their
element as well, as Pope Innocent X,
And thou, my Friend—if, in these headlong
days,
When bigot Zeal her drunken antics playa
So near a precipice, that men the while
Look breathless on, and shudder while they smile—
If, in such fearful days, thou ’It dare to look
To hapless Ireland, to this rankling nook
Which Heaven has freed from poisonous things
in vain,
While G-ff-rd’s tongue and M-sgr-ve’s pen re-
main—
If thou hast yet no golden blinkers got
To shade thine eyes from this devoted spot,
Whose wrongs, tho’blazon’d o’er the world they be,
Placemen alone are privileg’d not to see—
Oh ! turn awhile, and tho’ the shamrock wreathes
My homely harp, yet shall the song it breathes
Of Ireland’s slavery, and of Ireland’s woes,
Live, when the memory of her tyrant foes "
Shall but exist, all future knaves to warn,
Embalm’d in hate, and canoniz’d by scorn!
When C-stler—gh *, in sleep still more profound
Than his own opiate tongue now deals around,
Shall wait th’ impeachment of that awfiriday
Which ev’n his practis’d hand can’t bribe away!
And oh! my Friend, vyert thou but near me now,
To see the spring diffuse o’er Erin’s brow
Smiles that shine out, unconquerably fair,
Ev’n thro’the blood-marks,left by C-md-n·^there!
*	The breach of faith which the managers of the Irish
Union have been guilty of in disappointing those hopes o{
emancipation which they excited in the bosoms of the
Catholics, is no new trait in the annals of English policy.
A similar deceit was practised to facilitate the Union with
Scotland, and hopes were held out of exemption from
the Corporation and Test Acts, in order to divert the
Parliament of that country from encumbering the measure
with any stipulation to that effect.
f Not the C-md-n, who speaks thus of Ireland:
“ Atque uno verbo dicam, sive lernes fecunditatem,
sive maris et portuum opportunitatem, sive incolas re-
spicies qui bellicosi sunt, ingeniosi, corporum lineamentis
conspicui, mirifici carnis mollitie et propter musculorum
teneritatem agilitate incredibili, a multis dotibus ita felix
est insula, ut non male dixerit Gyraldus, * naturam hoc
Zephyri regnum benigniori oculo respexisse .”
Couldet thou but see what verdure paints the sod
Which none but tyrants and their slaves have trod,
And didst thou know the spirit, kind and brave,
That warms the soul of each insulted slave,
Who, tir’d with struggling, sinks beneath his lot,
And seems by all but watchful France forgot *—
Thy heart would burn—yes, ev’n thy Piitite heart
Would bum to think that such a blooming part
Of the world’s garden, rich in nature’s charms,
And fill’d with social souls and vigorous arms,
Should be the victim of that canting crew,
So smooth, so godly, yet so devilish too,
*	Hie example of toleration, which Bonaparte has
given, will produce, I fear, no other effect than that of
determining the British Government to persist, -from the
veiy spirit of opposition, in their own old system of in-
tolerance and injustice; just as the Siamese blacken their
teeth, “ because,” as they say, “ the devil has white
ones
1 See L'Histoire Naturelle et Polit. du Roiaume de
Siam, &c.
»
Who, arm’d at once with pray’r-books and with
whips
Blood on their hands, and Scripture on their lips,
Tyrants by creed, and torturers by text,
Make this life hell, in honour of the next!
*	One of the unhappy results of the controversy be-
tween Protestants and Catholics is tlie mutual exposure
which their criminations and recriminations have produced.
In vain do the Protestants charge the Papists with closing
the door of salvation upon others, while many of their
own writings and articles breathe the same uncha-
ritable spirit. No Canon of Constance or Lateran ever
damned heretics more effectually than the eighth of the
Thirty-nine Articles consigns to perdition every single
member of the Greek church, and I doubt whether a more
sweeping clause of damnation was ever proposed in the
most bigotted council, than that which the Calvinistic
theory of predestination in the seventeenth of these Ar-
ticles exhibits. It is true that no liberal Protestant avows
•uch exclusive opinions; that every honest clergyman must
feel a pang while he subscribes to them; that some even
assert the Athanasian Creed to be the forgery of one Vi-
gilius Tapsensie, in the beginning of the 6th century, and
that eminent divines, like Jortin, have not hesitated to say,
“ There
YourR-desd-les, P-rc-v-ls—oh, gracious Heaven?
If I Hn presumptuous, be my tongue forgiven,
u There are propositions contained in our Liturgy and
Articles, which no man of common sense amongst us
believes But while all this is freely conceded to Pro-
testants ; while nobody doubts their sincerity, when they
declare that their articles are not essentials of faith,
but a collection of opinions which have been pro-
mulgated by fallible men, and from many of which they
feel .themselves justified in dissenting,-^-while so much
liberty of retraction is allowed to Protestants upon their
own declared and subscribed Articles of religion, is it not
strange that a similar indulgence should be refused, with
such inconvincible obstinacy, to the Catholics, upon tenets
which their church has uniformly resisted and condemned,
in every country where it has flourished independently?
When the Catholics say, “ The decree of the council of
Lateran, which you object to us, has no claim whatever
upon either our faith or our reason; it did not even pro-
fess to contain any dpctrinal decision, but was merely a
judicial proceeding of (hat assembly; and it w ould be as
fair for us to impute a wife-killing, doctrine to the Pro-
testants, because their first Pope, Henry VIU, was sanc-
tioned in an indulgence of that propensity, as for you to
conclude that we have inherited a king-deposing taste from
1 Strictures on the Articles,, Subscriptions, &c.
tho
When here I swear* by my soul’s hope of rest*
I’d rather have been born, ere man was blest
the acts of the Council of Lateran, or the secular preten-
sions of our Popes. With respect too to the Decree of
the Council of Constance, upon the strength of which you
accuse us of breaking faith with heretics, we do not hesi-
tate to pronounce that Decree a calumnious forgery, a
forgery too so obvious and ill-fabricated, that none but
our enemies have ever ventured to give it the slightest
credit for. authenticity /’—When the Catholics make these
declarations (and they are almost weary with making
them); when they shew too, by their conduct, that these
declarations are sincere, and that their faith and moral*
are no more regulated by the absurd decrees of old coun-
cils and Popes, than their science is influenced by the
Papal anathema against that Irishman *, who first found
out the Antipodesis it not strange that so many stilt
wilfully distrust what every good man is so much interested
in believing ? That so many should prefer the dark-lantern
of the 13th century to the sunshine of intellect which has
since spread over the world, and that every dabbler in
*	Virgilius, surnarred Solivague, a native of Ireland, who
maintained in the 8th century the doctrine of the Antipodes,
and was anathematized accordingly by the Pope.—John
Scotus Frigena, another Irishman, was the first that ever
wrote against transubstantiation.
5	theology,
With the pure dawn of Revelation's light,
Yes!—rather plunge me back in Pagan night, -
And take my chance with Socrates for bliss *,
Than be the Christian of a faith like this,
theology, from Mr. Le Mesurier down to the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, should dare to oppose the rubbish of
Constance and Lateran to the bright triumphant progress
of justice, generosity, and truth ?	f
#	There.is a singular work “ upon the Souls of the
Pagans,” by one Franciscus Collius, in which he dis-
cusses, with much coolness and erudition, all the probate
of salvatiop upon which a heathen philpsopher
may calculate. He damns without much difficulty So-
crates, Plato, &c. and the only one at whose fate he seem$
$o hesitate is Pythagoras, in consideration of his golden
thigh and the m^ny miracles which he performed: but,
having balanced his claims a little, and finding reason
to father all these miracles on the devil, he at length, in
die twenty-fifth chapter, decides upon damning him also.
(De Animabus Paganorum, lib. iv. cap* 20 and 25.)—
Pante compromises the matter with the Pagans, and gives
them a neutral territory or limbo of their owp, where their
employment, it must be owned, is not very enviable—
“ Senza speme vivemo in desio.” Cant, iv.—Among;
the many errors imputed to^Qrigen, he is accused of
)iaving denied the eternity of fSure punishment, and, if he
h	never
Which builds on heavenly cant its earthly sway,
And in a convert mourns to lose a prey;	v
Which, binding polity in spiritual chains,
And tainting piety with temporal stains*,
never advanced a more irrational doctrine, we may forgive
liim. He went so far, however, as to include the devil
himself in the general hell-delivery which be supposed
would one day or other take pl^ce, and in this Sts
Augustin thinks him. rather too merciful—“ Miserecordior
profecto fuit Origenes, qui et ipsum diabolum, &c.” (De
Civitat. Dei, lib. xxi. cap. 17.)—St. Jerom says, that,
according to Origen, “ the devil, after a certain time, will
be as well off as the angel Gabriel“ Id ipsum fore
Gabrielem quod diabolum.” (See his Episde to Pam·
machius.) but H&lloix, in his Defence of Origen, denies
that he had any of this misplaced tenderness for the devil.
·*—I take the liberty of recommending these notitia upon
damnation to the particular attention of the learned Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer.
*	Mr. Fox, in his Speech on the Repeal of die Test
Act (1790), condemns the intermixture of religion with
the political constitution of a state; u what purpose (he
asks) can it serve, except the baleful purpose of com-
municating and receiving contamination ? Under such an
alliance corruption must ^^ht upon the one, and slavery
bverwhelm the other.”	.	.
3	Locke
Corrupts both State and Church, and makes an oath
The knave and atheist’s passport into both—
Which, while it dooms dissenting souls to know
Nor bliss above nor liberty below,
Adds the slave’s suffering to the sinner’s fear,
And, lest he scape hereafter, racks him here * !
' Locke too says of the connexion between Church and
State, “‘ The boundaries on both sides lire fixed and im-
movable. He jumbles heaven and earth together, the
things most remote and opposite, who mixes these
two societies, which are in their original, end, busi-
ness, and in every thing, perfectly distinct and infinitely
different from each other.”—First Letter on Toleration.
The corruptions of Christianity may be dated from the
period of its establishment under Constantine, nor could
all the splendour which it then acquired atone for the peace
and purity which it lost.
#	I doubt whether, after all, there has not been as much
bigotry among Protestants as among Papists. According
to the hacknied quotation—	"
Iliacos intra muros peccatur et extra.
The great champion of the Reformation, 'Melanch-
thon, whom Jortin calls, “ a divine of much mildness
and good-nature” thus expresses his approbation of the
burning of Servetus: “ Legi (he says to Bullinger) quae
h 2	de
But no—-far other faith, far milder beams
Of heavenly justice warm the Christian’s dreams!
defierveti blasphemiis respondistis et pietatem ac judicia
vestra probo. Judico etiam senatum Genevensem recti
fecisse, quod hominem pertinacem et non omissurum
Wasphemias sustulit; ac miratus sum esse qui severitatem
illam improbent:”»—I have great pleasure in contrasting
with “ miM and good-natured” sentiments the fol-
lowing words of the Papist Baluze, in addressing his friend
Conringius“ Interim amemus, mi Conringi, et tametsi
diversas opiniones tuemur in causa religi6nis, moribus ta-
men diversi nop simus, qui eadem literarum studia sectamur.”
«—Herman. Conring. Epistol. par. secund. p. 56.
Hume tells us that the Commons, in the beginning of
Charles the First’s reign, “ attacked Montague, one of the
King’s chaplains, on account of a moderate book which he
had lately composed, ami which, to their great disgust,
saved virtuous Catholics ψ well as other Christians from
eternal torments.”—In the same manner a complaint was
lodged before the Lords of the Council against that ex-
cellent writer Hooker for having, in a Sermon against
Popery, attempted to save many of his Popish ancestors
for ignorance.—To these examples of Protestant tolera-
tion I shall beg leave to oppose the following extract from
a letter of old Roger Ascham (the tutor of Queen Eliza-
beth), which is preserved among the Harrington Papers,
.	'	and
His creed is writ on Mercy’s page above
By the pure hands of all-atoning Love! ;
and.was written in 1566 to the Earl of Leicester, com-
plaining of the Archbishop Young, who had taken away
his prebend in the church of York: “ Master Bourne1
did never grieve me half so moche in offering me wrong, as
Mr. Dudley and the Bishop of York doe, in taking away
my right. No byshopp in Q. Mary’s time would have so
dealt with me; not Mr. Bourne hymself, when Winchester
lived, durst have so dealt with me. For suche good esti-
mation in those dayes even the learnedst and wysestmen,
as Gardener and Cardinal Poole made of my poore ser-
vice, that, although they knewe perfectly that in religion,
both by open wrytinge and pryvie talke, I was contrarye
unto them; yea, when Sir Francis Englefield by name did
note me speciallye at the council-board, Gardener would
not suffer me to be called thither, nor touched ellswheare,
saiinge suche words of me in a lettre, as though lettres
cannot, I blushe to write them to your lordshipp. Win-
chester’s good-will stoode not in speaking faire and wishing
well, but he did in deede that for me *, whereby my wife
and children shall live the better when 1 am gone." (See
*	Sir John Bourne, Principal Secretary of State to Queen
Mary.	.
*	By Gardener's favour Ascham long held his fellowship,
though not resident.
Nugae
tfe weeps to see his soul’s Religion twine
The tyrant’s sceptre with her wreath divine,
And he, while round him sects and nations raise
To the one God their varying notes of praise,
Blesses each voice, whate’er its tone may be,
That serves to swell the general harmony * !
JNugae Antiquae, vol. i. p. 98, 99·)—If men who acted .
thus were bigots, what shall we call Mr. P-rc-v-1?
In Sutcliffe’s a Survey of Popery ” there is the follow-
ing assertion: “ Papists, that positively hold the heretical
and false doctrines of the modern church of Rome, can-
not possibly be saved.”—As a contrast to this and other
specimens of Protestant liberality, which it would be much
more easy than pleasant to collect, I refer my reader to
die Declaration of Le Pere Courayer, and, while he reads
the sentiments qf this pious man upon toleration, I doubt
not he will feel inclined to exclaim with Belsham, “ Kush,
ye Protestant bigots! and be confounded at the compari-
son of your own wretched and malignant prejudices with
the generous and enlarged ideas, die noble and animated
language of this Popish priest.”—Essays, xxvii. p. 86.
*	“ La tolerance est la chose du monde la plus propre
k ramener le siecle d’or et i faire un concert et une har-
monie de plusieurs voix et instrumens de diff&rens tons et
notes, aussi agr6able pour le moins que i’uniformiti d’ttne
seule
Such was the spirit, grandly, gently bright,
That fill’d, oh Fox! thy peaceful soul with light;
While blandly spreading, like that orb of air
Which folds our planet in its circling care,
The mighty sphere of thy transparent mind
Embrac’d the world, and breath’d for all mankind!
Last of the great, farewell!—yet not the last-—
Tho’ Britain’s sunshine hour with thee be past,
Ieme still one gleam of glory gives,
And feels but half thy loss, while Grattan lives,
----------------------.	'	»«|	>	I	—■ — ■	—	-	■■
aeule voix.” Bayle, Commentaire Philosophique, Sec.
part ii. chap. vi.—Both Bayle and Locke would have
treated the subject of Toleration in a manner more worthy
of themselves and of the cause, if they had written in «9
'ege less distracted by religious prejudices.
END 07 THE FIRST PAST.
APPENDIX.
APPENDIX.
The following is part of a Preface which was intended
by a friend and countryman of mine for a collection of
Irish airs to which he had adapted English words. As it
has never been published, and is not inapplicable to my
subject, I shall take the liberty of subjoining it here.
# ♦ # · ‘
u Our history, for many centuries past, is creditable
neither to our neighbours or ourselves, and ought not to
be iead by any Irishman who wishes either to love Eng-
land or to feel proud of Ireland. The loss of independ^
ence very early debased our character, and our feuds and
rebellions, though frequent and ferocious, but seldom
displayed that generous spirit of enterprise, with which
the pride of an independent monarchy so long dignified the
struggles of Scotland. It is true this island has given birth
to heroes who, under more favourable circumstances,
might have left in the hearts of their countrymen recol-
lections as dear as those of a Bruce or a Wallace; bat
success was wanting to consecrate resistance, their cause
was branded with the disheartening name of treason, and
their oppressed country was such a blank among nations,
that, like the adventures of those woods which Rinaldo
wished to explore, the fame of their actions was lost in
the obscurity of the place where they achieved them.
——errando in quelli boschi
Trovar potria strane awenture e molte,
Ma come i luoghi i fatti ancor son foschi,
'	Che	non se*n ha notizia le piil volte *.
“ Hence it is that the annals of Ireland, through a long
lapse of six hundred years, exhibit not one of those shining
. names, not one of those themes of national pride, from
which poetry borrows her noblest inspiration, and that
history, which ought to be the richest garden of the Muse,,
yields nothing to her here but weeds and cypress. In truth,
the poet who would embellish his song with allusions to
Irish names, and events, must be content to seek them in
those early periods when our character was yet unalloyed4
and original, before the impolitic craft of our conquerors
„ had divided, weakened^ and disgraced us; and the only
traits of heroism which he can venture at this day to com-
#	Ariosto, canto iv.
memorate, with safety to himself, or, perhaps, with hdnOur
to the country, are to be looked for in those times when
the native monarchs of Ireland displayed and fostered
virtues worthy of a better age; when our Malachies wore
collars of gold which they had won in single combat from
the invader*, and our Briens deserved the blessings of a
people by all the most estimable qualities of a king. It
may be said indeed that the magic of tradition has shed a
charm over this remote period, to which it is in reality but
little entitled, and that most of the pictures, which we
dwell on so fondly, of days when this island was distin-
guished amidst the gloom of Europe, by the sanctity of
her morals, the spirit of her knighthood, and the polish
of her schools, are little more than the inventions of na-
tional partiality, that bright but spurious offspring which
vanity engenders upon ignorance, and with which the first
records of every people abound. But the sceptic is
scarcely to be envied who would pause for stronger proofs
than we already possess of the early glories of Ireland;
and were even the veracity of all these proofs surrendered,
yet who would not fly te such flattering fictions from the
sad degrading truths which the history of later times pre-
sents to us ?
*	See Warner’s History of Ireland, vol. i. b.ook be.
“ The language of sorrow however is, in general, best
suited to our Music, and with themes of this nature the
poet may be amply supplied. There is not a page of our
annals which cannot afford him a subject, and while the
national Muse of other countries adorns her temple with
trophies of the past, in Ireland her altar, like the shrine
of Pity at Athens, is to be known only by the tears' that
are shed upon it; ‘ lacrymis altaria sudant*/
“ There is a well-known story, related of the Antiochians
under the reign of Theodosius, which is not only ho-
nourable to the powers of music in general, but which
applies so peculiarly to the mournful melodies of Ireland,
that I cannot resist the temptation of introducing it here.
—The piety of Theodosius would have been admirable,
if it had not been stained with intolerance; but his reign
affords, I believe, the first example of a disqualifying penal
code enacted by Christians against Christians f. Whether
*	Statius, Thebaid. lib. xii.
f " A sort of civil excommunication (says Gibbon)
which separated them from their fellow-citizens by a pe-
culiar brand of infamy; and this declaration of the supreme
magistrate tended to justify, or at least to excuse, the in·
suits of a fanatic populace. The sectaries were gradually
disqualified for the possession of honourable or lucrative
employments.
his interference with the religion of the Antiochians had
any share in the alienation of their loyalty is not expressly
ascertained by historians; but severe edicts, heavy taxa-
tion, and the rapacity and insolence of the men whom he
sent to govern them, sufficiently account for the discon-
tents of a warm and susceptible people. Repentance
$oon followed the crimes into which their impatience had
hurried them, but the vengeance of the Emperor was im-
placable, and punishments of the most dreadful nature
hung over the city of Antioch, whose devoted inhabitants,
totally resigned to despondence, wandered through the
streets and public assemblies, giving utterance to their
grief in dirges of the most touching lamentationAt
employments, and Theodosius was satisfied with his own
justice when he decreed, that, as the Eunomians distin-
guished the nature of the Son from that of the Father, they
should be incapable of making their wills, or of receiving
any advantage from testamentary donations.”
*	Μιλ* wy* ολοφυξμα ιτληρ*ι xeu σισν&ψιιοι,
rcuf ΐΗλω&ιως «mioy. Nicephor. lib. xii. cap. 43.—'This
story is also in Sozomen, lib. vii. cap. £3; but unfortu-
nately Chiysostom says nothing whatever about it, and he
not only had the best opportunities of information,
but was too fond of music, as appears by liis praises
of psalmody (Exposit, in Psalm» xli.), to omit such a
4	flattering
length, Flavianus, their bishop, whom they sent to inter-
cede with Theodosius, finding all his entreaties coldly re-
jected, adopted the expedient of teaching these softgs of
sorrow, which he had heard from the lips of his unfortu-
nate countrymen, to the minstrels who perfofmed for the
Emperor at table. The heart of Theodosius could -not
resist this appeal; tears fell fast into his cup while he
listened, and the Antiochians were forgiven.—Surely, if
music ever spoke the misfortunes of a people, or could
ever conciliate forgiveness for their errors, the music of
Ireland ought to possess those powers!”
* * *	*
flattering illustration of its powers. He imputes their re-
conciliation to the interference of the Antiochian solitaries,
while Zozimus attributes it to the remonstrances of the
sophist Libanius.-i-Gibbon, I think, does not even allude
to the story of the musicians.
.	THE	end.	'
>:-VT
S. Gosnsll, Printer, Little Qtifcca Street.