FRANCIS, EARL OF MOIRA,
GENERAL IN HIS MAJESTY'S FORCES, MASTER-GENERAL OF THE ORDNAPC&
■CONSTABLE OF THE TOWER, &c. &c.
MY LORD,
It is impossible to think of addressing a Dedication
to your Lordship without calling to mind the well-known reply of
the Spartan to a rhetorician, who proposed to pronounce an eulo-
gium on Hercules. “ On Hercules!" said the hionest Spartan,
“ who ever thought of blaming Hercules ?” In a similar manner
the concurrence of public opinion has left to the panegyrist of your
Lordship a very superfluous task. I shall therefore be silent on the
subject, and merely entreat your indulgence to the very humble tri-
bute of gratitude, which I have here the honour to present.
I am,
MY LORD,
With every feeling of attachment and respect,
Your Lordship's very devoted Servant,
6*7, Bury Street, St. Jawut*^
April 10, 1806.
THOMAS MOORE.
ΠΕΡΓΠΛΕΤΣΑΙ ΜΕΝ ΠΟΛΛΑΣ ΠΟΛΕΙΣ ΚΑΛΟΝ, ΕΝΟΙΚΗΣΑΙ ΔΕ ΤΗ
ΚΡΑΤΙΣΤΗ ΧΡΗΣΙΜΟΝ.
Plutarch. Xtpi tcutia» α,γωγης.
\
• i > ·. u
PREFACE.
The principal poems in the following Collection were
written during an absence of fourteen months from
Europe. Though curiosity was certainly not the mo-
tive of my voyage to America, yet it happened that
the gratification of curiosity was the only advantage
which I derived from, it. Finding myself in the
country of a new people, whose infancy had promised
so much, and whose progress to maturity has been
an object of such interesting speculation, I determined
to employ the short period of time, which my plaii of
return to Europe afforded me, in travelling through a
few of the States and acquiring some knowledge of
the inhabitants.
The impression, which my mind received from the
character and manners of these republicans, suggested
the Epistles which are written from the City of Wash-
ington and Lake Erie \ How far I was right, in thus
assuming the tone of a satirist against a people whom
I viewed but as a stranger and a visitor, is a doubt
which my feelings did not allow me time to investi-
gate. All I presume to answer for is the fidelity of
the picture which I have given ; and though prudence
might have dictated gentler language, truth, I think,
would have justified severer.
♦
I went to America, with prepossessions by no means
unfavourable, and indeed rather indulged in many of
those illusive ideas, with respect to the purity of the
government and the primitive happiness of the people,
tvhich I had early imbibed in my native country,
where, unfortunately, discontent at home enhances
every distant temptation, and the western world has
long been looked to as a retreat from real or imagi-
nary oppression; as the elysian Atlantis, where per-
secuted patriots might find their visions realized, and
be welcomed by kindred spirits to liberty and repose.
I was completely disappointed in every flattering ex-
pectation which I had formed, and was inclined to say
to America, as Horace says to his mistress, “ intentata
1 Epistles VI. VII. and VIII.
nites/* Brissot, in the preface to his travels, observes,
that “ freedom in that country is carried to so high a
degree as to border upon a state of nature ;* and there
certainly is a close approximation to savage life, not
only in the liberty which they enjoy, but in the violence
of party spirit and of private animosity which results
from it. This illiberal zeal embitters all social inter-
course ; and, though I scarcely could hesitate in select-
ing the party, whose views appeared the more pure and
rational, yet I was sorry to observe that, in asserting
their opinions, they both assume an equal share of in-
tolerance ; the Democrats, consistently with their
principles, exhibiting a vulgarity of rancour, which
the Federalists too often are so forgetful of their cause
as to imitate.
The rude familiarity of the lower orders, and in-
deed the unpolished state of society in general, would
neither surprise nor disgust if they seemed to flow
from that simplicity of character, that honest igno-
rance of the gloss of refinement, which may be look-
ed for in a new and inexperienced people. But, when
we find them arrived at maturity in most of the vices,
and all the pride, of civilization, while they are
still so remote from its elegant characteristics, it ifc
impossible not to fetil that this youthful decay, this
crude anticipation of the natural period of corruption
represses every sanguine hope of the future energy and
greatness of America.
I am conscious that, in venturing these few remarks,
I have said just enough to offend, and by no means
sufficient to convince; for the limits of a preface will
not allow me to enter into a justification of my opi-
nions, and I am committed on the subject as effectu-
ally, as if I had written volumes in their defence. My
reader, however, is apprised of the very cursory ob-
servation upon which these opinions are founded, and
can easily decide for himself upon the degree of atten-
tion or confidence which they merit.
With respect to the poems in general, which occupy
the following pages, I know not in what manner to
apologize to the public for intruding upon their notice
such a mass of unconnected trifles, such a world of
epicurean atoms as I have here brought in conflict
together. To say that I have been tempted by the
liberal offers of my bookseller is an excuse which can
hope for but little indulgence from the critic; yet I
own that, without this seasonable inducement, these
poems very possibly would never have been submitted
to the world. The glare of publication is too strong
for such imperfect productions : they should be shewn
but to the eye of friendship, in that dim light of pri-
vacy, which is as favourable to poetical as to female
beauty, and serves as a veil for faults, while it enhances
every charm which it displays. Besides, this is not a
period for the idle occupations of poetry, and times
like the present require talents more active and more
useful. Few have now the leisure to read such trifles,
and I sincerely regret that I have had the leisure to
write them.
EPISTLE I.
TO
LORD VISCOUNT STRANGFORD.
ABOARD THE PHAETON FRIGATE, OFF THE A20RES. BY MOONLIGHT.
Sweet Moon! if like Crotona's sage1,
Py any spell my hand could dare
To make thy disk its ample page,
And write my thoughts, my wishes there;
How many a friend, whose careless eye
Now wanders o’er that starry sky,
Should smile, upon thy orb to meet
The recollection, kind and sweet,
1 Pythagoras} who was supposed to have a power of writing upon the
Moon by the means of a magic mirror. See Bayle, Art. Pythag.
The reveries of fond regret,
The promise, never to forget,
And all my heart and soul would send
To many a dear-lov’d, distant friend!
Oh Strangford ! when we parted last,
I little thought the times were past,
For ever past, when brilliant joy
Was all my vacant heart’s employ:
When, fresh from mirth to mirth again,
We thought the rapid hours too few,
Our only use for knowledge then
To turn to rapture all we knew!
Delicious days of whim and soul!
When, mingling lore and laugh together,
We lean’d the book on Pleasure’s bowl,
And turn’d the leaf with Folly’s feather!
I little thought that all were fled,
That, ere that Summer s bloom was shed,
My eye should see the sail unfurl’d
That wafts me to the Western World!
But, oh! ’twas time-------in youth, awhile,
To cool the season’s burning smile,

The heart may let its wanton wing
Repose in Pleasure’s soft’ning spring;
But, if it wait for Winter s breeze,
The spring will dry, the heart will freeze!
And then, that Hope, that fairy Hope,
Oh ! she awak’d such happy dreams,
And gave my soul such tempting scope
For all its dearest, fondest schemes,
That not Verona’s child of song,
When flying from the Phrygian shore,
With lighter hopes could bound along,
Or pant to be a wanderer more2!
Even now delusive Hope will steal
Amid the dark regrets I feel,
Soothing, as yonder placid beam
Pursues the murmurers of the deep,
And lights them with consoling gleam,
And smiles them into tranquil sleep !
*	Alluding to these animated lines in the 44th Carmen of this Poet:
Jam mens praetrepidans avet vagari,
Jam laeti studio pedes vigescunt!
Oh ! such a blessed night as this,
I often think, if friends were near,
How we should feel, and gaze with bliss
Upon the moon-bright scenery here !
The sea is,like a silvery lake,
And, o’er its calm the vessel glides
Gently, as if it fear’d to wake
The slumber of the silent tides!
The only envious cloud that lowers,
Hath hung its shade on Pico's height3,
Where dimly, mid the dusk, he towers,
And scowling at this heav’n of light,
Exults to see the infant storm
Cling darkly round his giant form!
Now, could I range those verdant isles,
Invisible, at this soft hour,
And see the looks, the melting smiles,
That brighten many an orange bower;
3	Pico is a very high mountain on one of the Azores, from which the
Island derives its name. It is said by some to be as high as the Peak of
Teneriffe.
And could I lift each pious veil,
And see the blushing cheek it shades,
Oh! I should have full many a tale,
To tell of young Azorian maids4:
Dear Strangford ! at this hour, perhaps,
Some faithful lover (not so blest
As they, who in their ladies* laps
May cradle every wish to rest,)
Warbles, to touch his dear one’s soul,
Those madrigals, of breath divine,
Which Camoens’ harp from rapture stole
And gave, all glowing warm, to thine5!
Oh ! could the lover learn from thee,
And breathe them with thy graceful tone,
Such dear, beguiling minstrelsy
Would make the coldest nymph his own!
But, hark!—the boatswain’s pipings tell
’Tis time to bid my dream farewell:
*	I believe it is Guthrie who says, that the inhabitants of the Azores
are much addicted to gallantry. This is an assertion in which even
Guthrie may be credited.
s These islands belong to the Portugueze.
Eight bells!—the middle watch is set:
Good night, my Stbangvoed !—ne’er
That, far beyond the Western Sea
Is one, whose heart remembers thee!
forget
STANZAS.
θνμΑ{ te «v? t(M{.........
..............JUJ ffQffWVtl fafa'
TircooTu fXY$gwttia jlmj nfiuv αγαν.
JEickfL Fragmat.
A beam of tranquillity smil’d in the West,
The storms of the morning pursued us no more,
And the wave, while it welcom’d the moment of rest,
Still heav’d, as remembering ills that were o’er!
Serenely my heart took the hue of the hour,
Its passions were sleeping, were mute as the dead,
And the spirit becalm’d but remember’d their power,
As the billow the force of the gale that was fled!
I thought of the days, when to pleasure alone
My heart ever granted a wish or a sigh;
When the saddest emotion my bosom had known,
Was pity for those who were wiser than I!
I felt, how the pure, intellectual fire
In luxury loses its heavenly ray;
How soon, in the lavishing cup of desire,
The pearl of the soul may be melted away!
And I pray’d of that Spirit who lighted the flame,
That pleasure no more might its purity dim;
And that sullied but little, or brightly the same,
I might give back the gem I had borrow’dfromhim!
The thought was extatic ! I felt as if Heaven
Had already the wreath of eternity shown;
As if, passion all chasten’d and error forgiven,
My heart had begun to be purely its own!
I look’d to the West, and the beautiful sky
Which morning had clouded, was clouded no more—
“ Oh! thus,” I exclaim’d, “ can a heavenly Eye
“ Shed light on the soul that was darken’d before!”
THE
TELL-TALE LYRE.
Γυε heard, there was in ancient days
A Lyre of most melodious spell;
'Twas heav n to hear its fairy lays,
If half be true that legends tell.
’Twas play’d on by the gentlest sighs,
And to their breath it breath'd again
In such entrancing melodies
As ear had never drunk till then!
Not harmony’s serenest touch
So stilly could the notes prolong;
They were not heavenly song so much
As they were dreams of heavenly song!
If sad the heart, whose murmuring air
Along the chords in languor stole,
The soothings it awaken’d there
Were eloquence from Pity’s soul!
Or if the sigh, serene and light,
Was but the breath of fancied woes,
The string, that felt its airy flight,
Soon whisper’d it to bland repose !
And oh ! when lovers burn’d alone,
If, mid their bliss the Lyre was near,
It made their murmurs all its own.
And echoed notes that heav’n might hear!
There was a nymph, who long had lov’d,
But dar’d not tell the world how well;
The shades, where she at evening rov’d,
Alone could know, alone could tell.
’Twas there, at twilight time, she stole
So oft, to make the dear-one blest,
Whom love had giv’n her virgin soul,
And nature soon gave all the rest!
Within a cave, where many an hour
Their bliss had found its secret bed,
A Lyre, of this enchanted power,
Hung, nightly-whispering o’er their head!
Oh! think, with every breath that mov'd
From lips, so thrilling warm as theirs,
Think how, with every sigh, it lov’d
To mingle its dissolving airs!
And, oft as passion’s milder fire
Could love’s communing calm allow,
The youth would make the grateful Lyre
A pillow for his angel’& brow !
And while the melting vows she breath’d
On all its echoes wanton’d round,
Her hair, amid the strings enwreath’d,
Through golden mazes charm’d the sound!
Alas! their hearts but little thought,
While thus entranc’d they listening lay,
That every sound the Lyre was taught
Should linger long, and long betray !
Yet, who can blame the guiltless Lyre!
Long had its spirit learn’d to dwell
On every accent of desire,
That from their lips unconscious fell;
The falter’d name, the murmuring play,
The bashful sigh, the chiding dear,
The lisping things that love will say,
And all but love will blush to hear!
Till, so commingled with its soul
Was every blissful breathing grown,
That other sighs, unanswer d stole,
Nor chang’d the sweet, the treasur’d tone.
Unhappy nymph ! thy hallow’d name
To every whispering lip was si ghd;
Thy secret vow, thy pleas of shame
On every ear in murmurs died !
The fatal Lyre, by envy’s hand
Hung high amid the breezy groves,
To every passing gale that fann’d
Betray’d the mystery of your loves!
Yet oh!—not many a suffering hour,
Thy cup of shame by man was giv’n;
Benignly came some pitying power,
And took the Lyre and thee to heaven!
There, as thy lover drys the tear
Yet warm from life’s malignant wrongs,
Within his arms, thou lov’st to hear
The luckless Lyre’s remember’d songs!
Still do your happy souls attune
The notes it learn’d, on earth, to move;
Still, breathing o’er the chords, commune
In sympathies of angel love !
το
THE FLYING-FISH1.
W hen I have seen thy snowy wing
O’er the blue wave at evening spring,
And give those scales, of silver white,
So gaily to the eye of light,
As if thy frame were form’d to rise,
And live amid the glorious skies;
Oh! it has made me proudly feel,
How like thy wing’s impatient zeal
Is the pure soul, that scorns to rest
Upon the world’s ignoble breast,
*	It is the opinion of St. Austin upon Genesis, and I believe of nearly
all the Fathers, that birds, like fish, were originally produced from the waters;
in defence of which idea they have collected every fanciful circumstance,
which can tend to prove a kindred similitude between them; βνγγινεαα τοις
-πίτομ^νοις προς t* vyjhtx. With this thought in our minds when we first
see the Flying-Fish, we could almost fancy, that we are present at the mo-
ment of creation, and witness the birth of the first bird from the waves.
But takes the plume that God has given,
And rises into light and heaven !
But, when I see that wing, so bright,
Grow languid with a moment's flight,
Attempt the paths of air, in vain,
And sink into the waves again;
Alas ! the flattering pride is o'er;
Like thee, awhile, the soul may soar,
But erring man must blush to think,
Like thee, again, the soul may sink!
Oh Virtue ! when thy clime I seek,
Let not my spirit's flight be weak:
Let me not, like this feeble thing,
With brine still dropping from its wing,
Just sparkle in the solar glow,
And plunge again to depths below;
But, when I leave the grosser throng
With whom my soul hath dwelt so long,
Let me, in that aspiring day,
Cast every lingering stain away,
And, panting for thy purer air,
Fly up at once and fix me there !
EPISTLE II.
TO
MISS Μ--------E.
FROM NORFOLK, IN VIRGINIA, NOVEMBER, 1803.
I* days, my Kate, when life was new,
When, lull’d with innocence and you,
I heard, in home's beloved shade,
The din the world at distance made;
When, every night my weary head
Sunk on its own unthorned bed,
And, mild as evening’s matron hour
Looks on the faintly shutting flower,
A mother saw our eyelids close,
And bless’d them into pure repose!
Then, haply if a week, a day,
I ling er’d from your arms away,
How long the little absence seem'd !
How bright the look of welcome beam’d,
As mute you heard, with eager smile,
My tales of all that pass’d the while!
Yet now, my Kate, a gloomy sea
Rolls wide between that home and me;
The moon may thrice be born and die,
Ere ev’n your seal can reach mine eye;
And oh! ev’n then, that darling seal,
(Upon whose print, I us’d to feel
The breath of home, the cordial air
Of loved lips, still freshly there!)
Must come, alas! through every fate
Of time and distance, cold and late,
When the dear hand, whose touches fill’d
The leaf with sweetness may be chill’d !
But hence, that gloomy thought! at last,
Beloved Kate! the waves are past:
I tread on earth securely now,
And the green cedar’s living bough
Breathes more refreshment to my eyes
Than could a Claude’s divinest dies!
At length I touch the happy sphere
To liberty and virtue dear,
Where man looks up, and proud to claim
His rank within the social frame,
Sees a grand system round him roll,
Himself its centre, sun and soul!
Far from the shocks of Europe; far
From every wild, elliptic star
That, shooting with a devious fire,
Kindled by heaven's avenging ire,
So oft hath into chaos hurl'd
The systems of the ancient world!
The warrior here, in arms no more,
Thinks of the toil, the conflict o'er,
And glorying in the rights they won
For hearth and altar, sire and son,
Smiles on the dusky webs that hide
His sleeping sword's remember'd pride!
While peace, with sunny cheeks of toil,
Walks o'er the free, unlorded soil,
Effacing with her splendid share,
The drops that war had sprinkled there!
Thrice happy land ! where he who flies
From the dark ills of other skies,
From scorn, or want’s unnerving woes,
May shelter him in proud repose!
Hope sings along the yellow sand
His welcome to a patriot land;
At once, the mighty wood receives
The stranger in its world of leaves,
Which soon their barren glory yield
To the warm shed and cultur’d field;
And he, who came, of all bereft,
To whom malignant fate had left
Nor home nor friends nor country dear,
Finds home and friends and country here!
Such is the picture, warmly such,
That long the spell of fancy’s touch
Hath painted to my sanguine eye
Of man’s new world of liberty!
Oh ! ask me not, if truth will seal
The reveries of fancy’s zeal,
If yet, my charmed eyes behold
These features of an age of gold—
No____yet, ala»! no gleaming trace1!
Ntfvr?r did youth, who lov'd a fac6
From portrait'» ro»y, flattering art,
Rif coil with more regret of heart,
To find an owlet eye of grey,
When? painting pour'd the sapphire's ray,
Than I have felt, indignant felt,
To think the glorious dreams should melt,
1 Hucli romantic work* as ** The American Farmer’s Letters/’ and the ac-
count of Kentucky by Imluy, would seduce us into a belief, that innocence,
peace, and IVecdom hud deserted the rest of the world, for Martha’s Vineyard
mid the? lunik* of the Ohio. The French travellers too, almost all from revo-
lutionary motives Imvc contributed their share to the diffusion of this flattering
niieronception. Λ visit to the country is however quite sufficient to correct
fevcit the moHt enthusiastic prepossession.
In the ferment which the French revolution excited among the democrats
of America, and the liccntious sympathy with which they shared in the wildest
cxcchncm of jacobinism, wo may find one source of that vulgarity of vice, that
hostility to nil the gruccs of life, which distinguishes the present demagogues
of the United States, and has become indeed too generally the characteristic
of I heir countrymen. But there is another cause of the corruption of private
moral», which, encouraged us it is by the government and identified with the
Intercut* of (lie community, seems to threaten the decay of all honest principle
in America. I alludo to those fraudulent violations of neutrality to which they
nre indebted for the most lucrative part of their commerce, and by which they
have no lonj; infringed and counteracted the maritime rights and advantages
of tlti* wuntrv. This unwarrantable trade is necessarily abetted by such a
*v*tcm of i'tdliiMon, imposture, and |>erjwry, os cannot fail to spread rapid con-
tamination around it.
Which oft, in boyhood’s witching time,
Have rapt me to this wond’rous clime!
But, courage! yet, my wavering heart»
Blame not the temple’s meanest parts,
Till you have trac’d the fabric o’er:—
As yet, we have beheld no more
Than just the porch to freedom's fane,
And, though a sable drop may stain
The vestibule, ’tis impious sin
To doubt there’s holiness within!
So here I pause—and now, my Kate,
To you (whose simplest ringlet’s fate
Can claim more interest in my soul
Than all the Powers from pole to pole)
One word at parting; in the tone
Most sweet to you, and most my own.
9 Norfolk, it must be owned, is an unfavourable specimen of America.
The characteristics of Virginia in general are not such as can delight either
the politician or the moralist, and at Norfolk they are exhibited in their
least attractive form. At the time when we arrived, the yellow fever had
not yet disappeared, and every odour that assailed us in the streets very
strongly accounted for its visitation. It is in truth a most disagreeable
place, and the best the journalist or geographer can say of it is, that it
abounds in dogs, in negroes, and in democrats. For further particulars
see Weld and Liancourt.
The simple notes I send you here V
Though rude, my love, would still be dear,
If you but knew the trance of thought,
In which my mind their murmurs caught.
’Twas one of those enchanting dreams,
That lull me oft, when music seems
To pour the soul in sound along,
And turn its every sigh to song!
I thought of home, the according lays
Respir’d the breath of happier days;
Warmly in every rising note
I felt a sweet remembrance float,
Till, led by music’s fairy chain,
I wander’d back to home again!
Oh! love the song, and let it oft
Live on your lip, in warble soft!
Say that it tells you, simply well,
All I have bid its murmurs tell,
Of memory’s glow, of dreams that shed
The tinge of joy when joy is fled,
And all the hearts illusive hoard
Of love renew’d and friends restor’d!
4	A trifling attempt at musical composition accompanied this Epistle.
Now, sweet, adieu!—this artless air,
And a few rhymes, in transcript fair*,
Are all the gifts I yet can boast
To send you from Columbia’s coast;
But when the sun, with warmer smile,
Shall light me to my destin’d isle6,
You shall have many a cowslip-bell
Where Ariel slept, and many a shell,
In which the gentle spirit drew
From honey flowers the morning dew J
5 The poems, which immediately follow.
*	Bermuda.
το
CARA,
AFTER AN INTERVAL OF ABSENCE.
Conceal’d within the shady wood
A mother left her sleeping child,
And flew, to cull her rustic food,
The fruitage of the forest wild.
But storms upon her path-way rise,
The mother roams, astray and weeping;
Far from the weak appealing cries
Of him she left so sweetly sleeping.
She hopes, she fears; a light is seen,
And gentler blows the night-wind’s breath;
Yet no—tie gone—the storms are keen,
The baby may be chill'd to death !
Perhaps his little eyes are shaded
Dim by death's eternal chill—
And yet, perhaps, they are not faded,
Life and love may light them still.
Thus, when my soul, with parting sigh,
Hung on thy hand's bewildering touch,
And, timid, ask'd that speaking eye,
If parting pain'd thee half so much:
I thought, and oh ! forgive the thought,
For who, by eyes like thine inspir’d,
Could e'er resist the flattering fault
Of fancying what his soul desir'd 1
Yes—I did think, in Cara's mind,
Though yet to Cara's mind unknown,
I left one infant wish behind,
One feeling, which I call'd my own \
Oh blest! though but in fancy blest,
How did I ask of pity's care,
To shield and strengthen, in thy breast,
The nursling I had cradled there.
And, many an hour beguil'd by pleasure,
And many an hour of sorrow numbering,
I ne'er forgot the new-born treasure,
I left within thy bosom slumbering.
Perhaps, indifference has not chill'd it,
Haply, it yet a throb may give—
Yet no—perhaps, a doubt has kill'd it!
Oh, Cara !—does the infant live 1
TO
CARA,
ON THE DAWNING OF A NEW YEAR’S DAY.
When midnight came to close the year,
We sigh’d to think it thus should take
The hours it gave us—hours as dear
As sympathy and love could make
Their blessed moments! every sun
Saw us, my love, more closely one!
But, Cara, when the dawn was nigh
Which came another year to shed,
The smile we caught from eye to eye
Told us, those moments were not fled;
Oh no !—we felt, some future sun
Should see us still more closely one!
Thus may we ever, side by side,
From happy years to happier glide,
And still, my Cara, may the sigh
We give to hours, that vanish o’er us,
Be follow’d by the smiling eye,
That Hope shall shed on scenes before us !
το
THE INVISIBLE GIRL'.
They try to persuade me, my dear little sprite,
That you are not a daughter of ether and light,
Nor have any concern with those fanciful forms
That dance upon rainbows and ride upon storms;
That, in short, you’re a woman; your lip and your breast
As mortal as ever were tasted or prest!
But I will not believe them—no, science! to you
I have long bid a last and a careless adieu:
Still flying from nature to study her laws,
And dulling delight by exploring its cause,
You forget how superior, for mortals below,
Is the fiction they dream to the truth that they know.
1 This and the subsequent poem have appeared in the public prints.
Oh! who, that has ever had rapture complete,
Would ask how we feel it, or why it is sweet;
How rays are confus'd, or how particles fly
Through the medium refin'd of a glance or a sigh !
Is there one, who but once would not rather have known it,
Than written, with Harvey, whole volumes upon it?
No—no—but for you, my invisible love,
I will swear, you are one of those spirits, that rove
By the bank where, at twilight, the poet reclines,
When the star of the west on his solitude shines,
And the magical fingers of fancy have hung
Every breeze with a sigh, every leaf with a tongue !
Oh! whisper him then, 'tis retirement alone
Can hallow his harp or ennoble its tone;
Like you, with a veil of seclusion between,
His song to the world let him utter unseen,
And like you, a legitimate child of the spheres,
Escape from the eye to enrapture the ears!
Sweet spirit of mystery! how I should love,
In the wearisome ways I am fated to rove,
To have you for ever invisibly nigh,
Inhaling for ever your song and your sigh!
Mid the crowds of the world and the murmurs of care,
I might sometimes converse with my nymph of the air,
And turn with disgust from the clamorous crew,
To steal in the pauses one whisper from you.
Oh! come and be near me, for ever be mine,
We shall hold in the air a communion divine,
As sweet as, of old, was imagin’d to dwell
In the grotto of Numa, or Socrates’ cell.
And oft, at those lingering moments of night,
When the heart is weigh’d down and the eyelid is light,
You shall come to my pillow and tell me of love,
Such as angel to angel might whisper above!
Oh spirit!—and then, could you borrow the tone
Of that voice, to my ear so bewitchingly known,
The voice of the one upon earth, who has twin’d
With her essence for ever my heart and my mind !
Though lonely and far from the light of her smile,
An exile and weary and hopeless the while,
Could you shed for a moment that voice on my ear,
I will think at that moment my Cara is near,
That she comes with consoling enchantment to speak^
And kisses my eyelid and sighs on my cheek,
And tells me, the night shall go rapidly by,
For the dawn of our hope, of our heaven is nigh!
Sweet spirit! if such be your magical power,
It will lighten the lapse of full many an hour;
And let fortune's realities frown as they will,
Hope, fancy, and Cara may smile for me still!
PEACE AND GLORY.
WRITTEN AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE PRESENT WAR.
here is now the smile, that lighten'd
Every hero’s couch of rest?
Where is now the hope, that brighten’d
Honor's eye and pity’s breast?
Have we lost the wreath, we braided
For our weary warrior-men ?
Is the faithless olive faded,
Must the bay be pluck’d again?
Passing hour of sunny weather
Lovely, in your light awhile,
Peace and Glory, wed together,
Wander’d through the blessed isle.
And the eyes of peace would glisten,
Dewy as a morning sun,
When the timid maid would listen
To the deeds her chief had done.
Is the hour of dalliance over ?
Must the maiden’s trembling feet
Waft her from her warlike lover
To the desart’s still retreat?
Fare you well! with sighs we banish
Nymph so fair and guest so hright;
Yet the smile, with which you vanish,
Leaves behind a soothing light!
Soothing light! that long shall sparkle
O'er your warriors sanguine way,
Through the field where horrors darkle,
Shedding hope’s consoling ray!
Long the smile his heart will cherish,
To its absent idol true,
While around him myriads perish,
Glory still will sigh for you!
το
----------, 1801.
To be the theme of every hour
The heart devotes to fancy’s power,
When her soft magic fills the mind
With friends and joys we’ve left behind,
And joys return and friends are near,
And all are welcom’d with a tear !
In the mind’s purest seat to dwell,
To be reinember’d oft and well
By one whose heart, though vain and wild,
By passion led, by youth beguil’d,
Can proudly still aspire to know
The feeling soul’s divinest glow !
If thus to live in every part
Of a lone weary wanderer’s heart;
If thus to be its sole employ
Can give thee one faint gleam of joy,
Believe it, Mary ! oh! believe
A tongue that never can deceive,
When passion doth not first betray
And tinge the thought upon its way!
In pleasure’s dream or sorrow’s hour,
In crowded hall or lonely bower,
The business of my life shall be,
For ever, to remember thee !
And though that heart be dead to mine,
Since love is life and wakes not thine,
I’ll take thy image, as the form
Of something I should long to warm,
Which, though it yield no answering thrill,
Is not less dear, is lovely still!
I’ll take it, wheresoe’er I stray,
The bright, cold burthen of my way!
To keep the semblance fresh in bloom,
My heart shall be its glowing tomb,
And love shall lend his sweetest care,
With memory to embalm it there!
SONG.
Take back the sigh, thy lips of art
In passion’s moment breath’d to me;
Yet, no—it must not, will not part,
’Tis now the life-breath of my heart,
And has become too pure for thee!
Take back the kiss, that faithless sigh
With all the warmth of truth imprest;
Yet, no—the fatal kiss may lie,
Upon thy lip its sweets would die,
Or bloom to make a rival blest!
Take back the vows that, night and day,
My heart receiv’d, I thought, from thine;
Yet, no—allow them still to stay,
They might some other heart betray,
As sweetly as they’ve ruin’d mine!
A BALLAD.
THE LAKE OF THE DISMAL SWAMP.
WRITTEN AT NORFOLK, IN VIRGINIA.
" They tell of a young mao, who lost his mind upon the death of a girl he loved, and
who, suddenly disappearing from hie friends, was never afterwards heard of. As he had
frequently said, in his ravings, that the girl was not dead, but gone to the Dismal Swamp,
it is supposed he had wandered into that dreary wilderness, and had died of hunger, or been
lost in some of its dreadful morasses.”
ANON.
“ They made her a grave, too cold and damp
“ For a soul so warm and true;
“ And she’s gone to the Lake of the Dismal Swamp1,
“ Where, all night long, by a fire-fly lamp,
“ She paddles her white canoe.
1 The Great Dismal Swamp is ten or twelve miles distant from Norfolk,
and the Lake in the middle of it (about seven miles long) is called Drum-
mond’s Pond.
“ And her fire-fly lamp I soon shall see,
“ And her paddle I soon shall hear;
“ Long and loving our life shall be,
“ And T\\ hide the maid in a cypress tree,
“ When the footstep of death is near Γ
Away to the Dismal Swamp he speeds—
His path was rugged and sore,
Through tangled juniper, beds of reeds,
Through many a fen, where the serpent feeds,
And man never trod before!
And, when on the earth he sunk to sleep,
If slumber his eyelids knew,
He lay, where the deadly vine doth weep
Its venomous tear and nightly steep
The flesh with blistering dew !
And near him the she-wolf stirrd the brake,
And the copper-snake breath’d in his ear,
Till he starting cried, from his dream awake,
“ Oh! when shall I see the dusky Lake,
“ And the white canoe of my dear ?”
He saw the Lake, and a meteor bright
Quick over its surface play’d—
“ Welcome,” he said, “ my dear-one’s light!”
And the dim shore echoed, for many a night,
The name of the death-cold maid!
Till he hollow’d a boat of the birchen bark,
Which carried him off from shore;
Far he follow’d the meteor spark,
The wind was high and the clouds were dark,
And the boat return’d no more.
But oft, from the Indian hunter’s camp
This lover and maid so true
Are seen at the hour of midnight damp,
To cross the Lake by a fire-fly lamp,
And paddle their white canoe !
EPISTLE III.
TO
THE MARCHIONESS DOWAGER OF D-----------LL.
FROM BERMUDA, JANUARY 1804.
Lady ! where’er you roam, whatever beam
Of bright creation warms your mimic dream;
Whether you trace the valley’s golden meads,
Where massy Linth his lingering current leads1;
Enamour'd catch the mellow hues that sleep,
At eve, on Meillerie’s immortal steep;
Or, lingering o’er the Lake, at day's decline,
Mark the last shadow on the holy shrine3,
1 Her Ladyship, I supposed, was at this time still in Switzerland, where
the powers of her pencil must have been frequently awakened.
*	The chapel of William Tell on the Lake of Lucerne.
Where, many a night, the soul of Tell complains
Of Gallia’s triumph and Helvetia’s chains;
Oh! lay the pencil for a moment by,
Turn from the tablet that creative eye,
And let its splendour, like the morning ray
Upon a shepherd’s harp, illume my lay!
Yet, Lady! no—for song so rude as mine,
Chase not the wonders of your dream divine;
Still, radiant eye! upon the tablet dwell;
Still, rosy finger! weave your pictur’d spell;
And, while I sing the animated smiles
Of fairy nature in these sun-born isles,
Oh ! might the song awake some bright design,
Inspire a touch, or prompt one happy line,
Proud were my soul, to see its humble thought
On painting’s mirror so divinely caught,
And wondering Genius, as he lean’d to trace
The faint conception kindling into grace,
Might love my numbers for the spark they threw,
And bless the lay that lent a charm to you!
Have you not oft, in nightly vision, stray’d
To the pure isles of ever-blooming shade,
Which bards of old, with kindly magic, plac’d
For happy spirits in th’ Atlantic waste3 ?
There as eternal gales, with fragrance warm,
Breath’d from elysium through each shadowy form,
In eloquence of eye, and dreams of song,
They charm’d their lapse of nightless hours along!
Nor yet in song, that mortal ear may suit,
For every spirit was itself a lute,
Where virtue waken’d, with elysian breeze,
Pure tones of thought and mental harmonies!
Believe me, Lady, when the zephyrs bland
Floated our bark to this enchanted land,
These leafy isles upon the ocean thrown,
Like studs of emerald o’er a silver zone;
Not all the charm, that ethnic fancy gave
To blessed arbours o’er the western wave,
Could wake a dream, more soothing or sublime,
Of bo were ethereal and the spirit’s clime !
5	M. Gebelin says, in his Monde Prhnitif, “ Lorsque Strabon criit que les
anciens theologiens et Poetes placoient les champs elysees dans les Isles de
l’Ocean Atlantique, il n’entendit rien a leur doctrine.” M. Gebelin’s
supposition, I have no doubt, is the more correct; but that of Strabo is,
in the present instance, most to my purpose.
The mom was lovely, every wave was still,
When the first perfume of a cedar-hill
Sweetly awak’d us, and with smiling charms,
The fairy harbour woo’d us to its arms4.
Gently we stole, before the languid wind,
Through plaintain shades, that like an awning twin’d
And kiss’d on either side the wanton sails,
Breathing our welcome to these vernal vales ;
While, far reflected o’er the wave serene
£ach wooded island shed so soft a green,
That the enamour'd keel, with whispering play,
Through liquid herbage seem’d to steal its way!
Never did weary bark more sweetly glide,
Or rest its anchor in a lovelier tide !
Along the margin, many a brilliant dome,
White as the palace of a Lapland gnome,
Brighten’d'the wave; in every myrtle grove
Secluded bashful, like a shrine of love,
4	Nothing can be more romantic than the little harbour of St. George's.
The number of beautiful islets, the singular clearness of the water, and the
animated play of the graceful little boats, gliding for ever between the
islands, and seeming to sail from one cedar-grove into another, form all
together the sweetest miniature of nature that can be imagined.
Some elfin mansion sparkled through the shade;
And, while the foliage interposing play’d,
Wreathing the structure into various grace,
Fancy would love, in many a form, to trace
The flowery capital, the shaft, the porch5,
And dream of temples, till her kindling torch
Lighted me back to all the glorious days
Of Attic genius; and I seem'd to gaze
On marble, from the rich Pentelic mount,
Gracing the umbrage of some Naiad's fount.
Sweet airy being6! who, in brighter hours,
Liv'd on the perfume of these honied bowers,
*	This is an illusion which, to the few who are fanciful enough to indulge
in it, renders the scenery of Bermuda particularly interesting. In the short
but beautiful twilight of their spring evenings, the white cottages scattered
over the islands, and but partially seen through the trees that surround
them, assume often the appearance of little Grecian temples, and fancy
may embellish the poor fisherman’s hut with columns which the pencil of
Claude might imitate. I had one favourite object of this kind in my walks,
which the hospitality of its owner robbed me of, by asking me to visit him.
He was a plain good man, and received me well and warmly, but I never
could turn his house into a Grecian temple again.
6	Ariel. Among the many charms which Bermuda has for a poetic eye,
we cannot for an instant forget that it is the scene of Shakspeare’s Tempest,
and that here he conjured up the “ delicate Ariel,” who alone is worth the
whole heaven of ancient mythology.
In velvet buds, at evening, lov’d to lie,
And win with music every rose’s sigh!
Though weak the magic of my humble strain,
To charm your spirit from its orb again,
Yet oh ! for her, beneath whose smile I sing,
For her, (whose pencil, if your rainbow wing
Were dimm’d or ruffled by a wintry sky,
Could smooth its feather and relume its dye,)
A moment wander from your starry sphere,
And if the lime-tree grove that once was dear,
The sunny wave, the bower, the breezy hill,
The sparkling grotto can delight you still,
Oh! take their fairest tint, their softest light,
Weave all their beauty into dreams of night,
And, while the lovely artist slumbering lies,
Shed the warm picture o’er her mental eyes;
Borrow for sleep her own creative spells,
And brightly shew what song but faintly tells!
THE
GENIUS OF HARMONY.
AN IRREGULAR ODE.
AD HARMONIAM CANIT MUNDUS.
Vide Cicero, de Nat. Dear. Lib. 3.
There lies a shell beneath the waves,
In many a hollow winding wreath’d,
Such as of old,
Echoed the breath that warbling sea-maids breath’d;
This magic shell
From the white bosom of a syren fell,
As once she wander’d by the tide that laves
Sicilia’s sands of gold.
It bears
Upon its shining side, the mystic notes
Of those entrancing airs1,
The genii of the deep were wont to swell,
When heaven’s eternal orbs their midnight music roll’d!
1	In L’Histoire naturelle des Antilles, there is an account of some cu-
rious shells, found at Cura^a, on the back of which- were lines, filled
Oh ! seek it, wheresoe'er it floats;
And, if the power
Of thrilling numbers to thy soul be dear,
Go, bring the bright shell to my bower,
And I will fold thee in such downy dreams,
As lap the spirit of the seventh sphere,
When Luna’s distant tone falls faintly on his ear2!
filled with musical characters so distinct and perfect, that the writer assures
us a very charming trio was sung from one of them. “ On le nomine
musical, par ce qu’il porte sur le dos des lignes noiratres pleines de notes,
qui ont une espece de cle pour les mettre en chant, de sorte que Ton diroit
qu’il ne manque que la lettre a cette tablature naturelle. Ce curieux gen-
tilhomme (M. du Montel) rapporte qu’il en a vu qui avoient cinq lignes,
une cle et des notes, qui formoient un accord parfait. Quelq’un y avoit
ajoute la lettre, que la nature avoit oubliee, et la faisoit chanter en forme de
trio, dont Pair etoit fort agreable.” Chap. 19- Art. 11. The author adds,
a poet might imagine that these shells were used by the syrens at their
concerts.
*	According to Cicero, and his commentator, Macrobius, the lunar tone is
the gravest and faintest on the planetary heptachord. “ Quam ob causam
summus ille coeli stellifer cursus, cujus conversio est concitatior, acuto et
excitato movetur sonoj gravissimo autem hic lunaris atque infimus.” Somn.
Scip. Because, says Macrobius, “ spiritu ut in extremitate languescente
jam volvitur, et propter angustias quibus penultimus orbis arctatur impetu
leniore convertitur.” In Somn. Scip. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. It is not very easy
to understand the ancients in their musical arrangement of the heavenly
bodies. See Ptolem. Lib. 3.
Leone Hebreo, pursuing the idea of Aristotle, that the heavens are ani-
mal, attributes their harmony to perfect and reciprocal love. “ Non pero
And thou shalt own,
That, through the circle of creation’s zone,
Where matter darkles or where spirit beams;
From the pellucid tides3, that whirl
The planets through their maze of song,
To the small rill, that weeps along
Murmuring o’er beds of pearl;
From the rich sigh
Of the sun’s arrow through an evening sky4,
To the faint breath the tuneful osier yields
On Afric’s burning fields5;
manca fra loro il perfetto et reciproco amore: la causa principale, che ne
mostra il loro amore, έ la lor amicitia harmoniaca & la concordantia, che per-
petuamente si trova in loro.” Dialog. 2. di Amore, p. 58. This “ reciproco
amore” of Leone is the φιλοτ^ς of the ancient Empedocles, who seems, in his
Love and Hate of the Elements, to liave given a glimpse of the principles of
attraction and repulsion. See the fragment to which I allude in Laertius,
Αλλοτε /xfv φιλοτητι, <τυνερχο^εν\ κ. τ. λ. Lib. 8. Cap. 2. η. 12.
3	Leucippus, the atomist, imagined a kind of vortices in the heavens, which
he borrowed from Anaxagoras, and possibly suggested to Descartes.
4	Heraclides, upon the allegories of Homer, conjectures that the idea of the
harmony of the spheres originated with this poet, who in representing the solar
beams as arrows, supposes them to emit a peculiar sound in the air.
5	In the account of Africa which d’Ablancourt has translated, there is
mention of a tree in that country, whose branches when shaken by the hamj
Oh ! thou shalt own this universe divine
Is mine!
That I respire in all and all in me,
One mighty mingled soul of boundless harmony!
Welcome, my shell!
How many a star has ceas'd to burn6,
How many a tear, has Saturn's gleaming urn
O'er the cold bosom of the ocean wept7,
Since thy aerial spell
Hath in the waters slept!
produce very sweet sounds. “ Le m£me auteur (Abenzegar) dit, qu’il y a un
certain arbre, qui produit des gaules comme d’osier, et qu’ en les prenant a
la main et les branlant, elles font une espece d’harmonie fort agreable,” &c. &c.
L’Afrique de Marmol.
6	The extinction, or at least the disappearance of some of those fixed stars,
which we are taught to consider as suns, attended each by its system, is a
curious subject for conjecture and hypothesis. Descartes thought that our
earth might formerly have been a sun, which became obscured by a thick
incrustation over its surface. This probably suggested the idea of a central
fire.
7	Porphyry says, that Pythagoras held the sea to be a tear. Ύψ Βαλοπταν ρ»
txotXet uvat ίαχρυον. De Vit. and some one else, if I mistake not, has added
the planet Saturn as the source of it. Empedocles, with similar affectation,
Mortal! I fly,
With the bright treasure to my choral sky,
Where she, who wak’d its early swell,
The syren, with a foot of fire,
Walks o’er the great string of my Orphic Lyre8,
Or guides around the burning pole
The winged chariot of some blissful soul9!
While thou!
Oh son of earth ! what dreams shall rise for thee!
Beneath Hispania’s sun,
Thou’lt see a streamlet run,
Which I have warm’d with dews of melody10;
Oh listen ! when the night-wind dies
Down the still current, like a harp it sighs!
called the sea “ the sweat of the earth :** ώρωτα της γης. See Rittershusius
upon Porphyry, Num. 41.
' The system of the harmonized orbs was styled by the ancients the Great
Lyre of Orpheus, for which Lucian accounts, η h Ανρη Ιπταμηος mra την των
xtvSfjLsvuv ατρων αρμονίαν σννεβαλλετο. κ. τ. λ. in Astrolog.
9 Δ/ί/λί φνγ/χς κταριΒ^ϋς τοις ατροις, ενειμε Β'εκχςην προς βχατον, χαι ιμβιβοκτας
*ί1Σ ΕΙΣ ΟΧΗΜΑ. Platon. Timaeus.
'° This musical river is mentioned in the romance of Achilles Tatius. Evu
ποταμχ * * * ψ ΰι xxxccu Βίλης τΰ ύπατος λαλϋντος. The Latin version, in sup-
plying the hiatus which is in the original, has placed the river in Hispania.
“ In Hispani^ quoque fluvius est, quem primo aspectu, &c. &c.”
A liquid chord is every wave that flows,
An airy plectrum every breeze that blows11!
There, by that wonderous stream,
Go, lay thy languid brow,
And I will send thee such a godlike dream,
Such---------mortal! mortal! hast thou heard of him1*,
Who, many a night, with his primordial lyre13,
Sate on the chill Pangaean mountu,
And, looking to the orient dim,
Watch’d the first flowing of that sacred fount,
From which his soul had drunk its fire!
11	These two lines are translated from the words of Achilles Tatius. Eav γαρ
ολίγος άνεμος εις τας hvag fj^wreoTj, to fw ύΰωρ ως γβρ&η xpttnat. το h πνεύμα τ»
vbcrof πληχτρον γίνεται. το ρεύμα & ας xiSapcc λαλει. Lib. 2.
m Orpheus.
13	They called his lyre οφχρ/οτροπο? επτάχορδον Ορψεως. See a curious work
by a professor of Greek at Venice, entitled M Hebdomades, sive septem de
septenario libri." Lib. 4. Cap. 3. p. 177·
14	Eratosthenes, telling the extreme veneration of Orpheus for Apollo, says
that he was accustomed to go to the Pangaean mountain at day-break, and there
wait the rising of the sun, that he might be the first to hail its beams. Etrεγειρό-
μενος ts της ννχτος, χατα τψ ΙωΒινην επι το ορος το χαλχμενον ΙΙαγγαιον, προα-ερενε
τας ανατολας9 ϊνα τον 'Ηλίβν πρώτον, Υίατατεριο-μ,, 24.
Oh! think what visions, in that lonely hour,
Stole o'er his musing breast!
What pious ecstasy15
Wafted his prayer to that eternal Power,
Whose seal upon this world imprest16
The various forms of bright divinity!
Or, dost thou know what dreams I wove,
'Mid the deep horror of that silent bower17,
Where the rapt Samian slept his holy slumber?
When, free
From every earthly chain,
From wreaths of pleasure and from bonds of pain,
15	There are some verses of Orpheus preserved to us, which contain sublime
ideas of the unity and magnificence of the Deity. As those which Justin
Martyr has produced:
'Ovftf fuv χαλχαοτ tf apavoy tafyptxreu
Xpvrtiw «vi SpQYiv, x. r. λ. Ad Grac. cohortat.
It is thought by some, that these are to be reckoned amongst the fabrica-
tions, which were frequent in the early times of Christianity. Still it appears
doubtful to whom we should impute them; they are too pious for the Pagans,
yet seem too fanciful for the Fathers.
16	In one of the Hymns of Orpheus, he attributes a figured seal to Apollo,
with which he imagines that deity to have stamped a variety of forms upon the
universe.
17	Alluding to the cave near Samos, where Pythagoras devoted the greater
His spirit flew through fields above,
Drank at the source of nature’s fontal number18,
And saw, in mystic choir, around him move
The stars of song, Heaven's burning minstrelsy!
Such dreams, so heavenly bright,
I swear
By the great diadem that twines my hair,
And by the seven gems that sparkle there19,
part of his days and nights to meditation and the mysteries of his philosophy.
Jamblich. de Vit. This, as Holstenius remarks, was in imitation of the
Magi.
18	The tetractys, or sacred number of the Pythagoreans, on which they
solemnly swore, and which they called παγαν aivau φυ<τεως, “ the fountain of
perennial nature.” Lucian has ridiculed this religious arithmetic very finely
in his Sale of Philosophers.
19	This diadem is intended to represent the analogy between the notes of
music and the prismatic colours. See Newton’s Opticks, Book 1. Exper. 7·
We find in Plutarch a vague intimation of this kindred harmony in colours and
sounds. Oip/f ts και αχοη, per* φωνής τε %cu φωτός τψ etppoytav επιφαινχσ-ι. De
Musica.
Cassiodorus, whose idea I may be supposed to have borrowed, says, in a
letter upon music to Boetius, “ Ut diadema oculis, varia luce gemmarum, sic
cythara diversitate soni, blanditur auditui." This is indeed the only tolerable
thought in the letter. Lib. 2. Variar.
Mingling their beams
In a soft iris of harmonious light,
Oh mortal! such ecstatic dreams
Thy soul shall know!—
Go—to Hispania go!
EPISTLE IV.
TO
GEORGE MORGAN, ESQ.
OP NORFOLK) VIRGINIA1.
FROM BERMUDA, JANUARY, 1804.
Kttvq S'ψηΜβνβτΛ xeu Afpvros, οια. θ’αλίΐ'λι;^,
AAvnjf nuu μάλλον etiSpoftAf rjettp Irroif,
Πβvfm iremjpixfcu.	Callimach. Hj/m. in Del. ».11.
Xhough late the word of friendship came2
Thanks from my soul to him who said it!
Impatient of the tardy claim,
Your friend was mine, before he read it.
1 This gentleman is attached to the British consulate at Norfolk. His ta-
lents are worthy of a much higher sphere, but the excellent dispositions of the
family with whom he resides, and the cordial repose he enjoys amongst some of
the kindest hearts in the world, should be almost enough to atone to him for the
worst caprices of fortune. The consul himself, Colonel Hamilton, is one among
Yet, though the social bond was wove,
’Twill serve to make the texture steady;
Like marriage after slips of love,
'Twill consecrate what's—done already!
Oh what a tempest whirl’d us hither3!
Winds, whose savage breath could wither
All the light and languid flowers
That bloom in Epicurus’ bowers !
Nor yet suppose, that fancy’s charm
Forsook me in this rude alarm.
the very few instances of a man, ardently loyal to his king, and yet beloved
by the Americans. His house is the very temple of hospitality, and I sin-
cerely pity the heart of that stranger who, warm from the welcome of such a
board, and with the taste of such Madeira still upon his lips, could sit down to
write a libel on his host, in the true spirit of a modern philosophist. See the
Travels of the Duke de la Rochefoucault Liancourt, Vol. 2.
*	A letter of recommendation, which I had omitted to take from Norfolk,
and which Mr. Morgan was kind enough to send after me to Bermuda. Its ob-
ject had been, however, anticipated by my introduction to the person to whom
it was addressed.
3	We were seven days on our passage from Norfolk to Bermuda, during three
of which we were forced to lay-to in a gale of wind. The Driver sloop of war,
in which I went, was built at Bermuda of cedar, and is accounted an excellent
sea-boat. She was then commanded by my very regretted friend Captain
When close they reef’d the timid sail,
When, every plank complaining loud,
We labour’d in the midnight gale,
And ev’n our haughty main-mast bow’d!
Fancy, in that unlovely hour,
Propitious came, her dream to shed,
And turn’d my cabin to a bower,
My canvass cot to rapture’s bed!
For she, the maid I’ve left behind,
Lay blushing in that canvass cot—
Oh ! where was then the raving wind ?
Amid her sighs I heard it not!
One night, I own, the storms it blew
Our little ship so rudely tost,
That slumber’s web was torn in two,
And fancy’s sweet embroidery lost!
Yet even then, the gentle muse,
Whose willing soul can ne’er refuse,
Compton, who in July last was killed aboard the Lilly in an action with a French
privateer. Poor Compton! he fell a victim to the strange impolicy of allowing
such a miserable thing as the Lilly to remain in the service; so small, crank,and
unmanageable, that a well manned merchantman was at any time a match for
her.
(Would every maid were half so kind!)
With song's endearment sooth'd my mind.
She open'd, with her golden key,
The casket where my memory lays
Those little gems of poesy,
Which time has sav'd from ancient days!
Take one of these, to Lais sung,
I wrote it, while my hammock swung,
As one might write a dissertation
Upon “ suspended animation !"
4 Sweetly you kiss, my Lais dear!
But, while you kiss, I feel a tear
4	This epigram is by Paulus Silentiarius, and may be found in the Analecta
of Brunck, Vol. S. p. 72. But as the reading there is somewhat different from
what I have followed in this translation, I shall give it as I had it in my
memory at the time, and as it is in Heinsius, who, I believe, first produced the
epigram. See his Poemata.
βΗίϋ μ*ν tori φιλ-ημ& to Aaiio^· ijfu ie avrtoy
Hirtoiivrjrujy Saxpv χεεις βλέφαρων,
Και *ολυ κ*χλίζ#τα νοβεις ευβοατρυχογ αιγλψ,
Hfierspa χεψΑλψ fypov sptur
Μυρομ*γηγ $ ’εφιληΓα' ta $'ως ίρονερης α*ο Τηγγε,
Δαχρυα μιγγυμ£νωψ #ntrs χαϊα στορ^ατωγ·
ΕHto ί*αγ&ρομ*γω, ηνος ηυβχλ δαχρυα, Κειβνς;
ΔίΐΛα pj fji£ Ximjf ears γαρ opxairarai.
Bitter, as those when lovers part,
In mystery from your eye-lid start!
Sadly you lean your head to mine,
And round my neck in silence twine,
Your hair along my bosom spread,
All humid with the tears you shed !
Oh ! I have kiss’d those lids of snow,
Yet still, my love, like founts they flow,
Bathing our cheeks, whene’er they meet—
Why is it thus ? do, tell me, sweet!
Ah, Lais ! are my bodings right?
Am I to lose you ? is to-night
Our last-------go, false to heaven and me!
Your very tears are treachery.
Such, while in air I floating hung,
Such was the strain, “ Morgante mio!”
The muse and I together sung,
With Boreas to make out the trio.
But, bless the little fairy isle!
How sweetly after all our ills,
We saw the dewy morning smile
Serenely o’er its fragrant hills !
And felt the pure, elastic flow
Of airs, that round this Eden blow,
With honey freshness, caught by stealth
Warm from the very lips of health!
Oh ! could you view the scenery dear,
That now beneath my window lies,
You’d think, that nature lavish’d here
Her purest wave, her softest skies,
To make a heaven for love to sigh in,
For bards to live and saints to die in!
Close to my wooded bank below,
In glassy calm the waters sleep,
And to the sun-beam proudly show
The coral rocks they love to steep5!
The fainting breeze of morning fails,
The drowsy boat moves slowly past,
And I can almost touch its sails
That languish idly round the mast.
9 The water is so beautifully clear around the island, that the rocks are seen
beneath to a very great depth, and as we entered the harbour, they appeared
to us so near the surface, that it seemed impossible we should not strike
on them. There is no necessity, of course, for heaving the lead, and the negro
pilot, looking down at the rocks from the bow of the ship, takes her through
The sun has now profusely given
The flashes of a noontide heaven,
And, as the wave reflects his beams,
Another heaven its surface seems!
Blue light and clouds of silvery tears
So pictur'd o’er the waters lie,
That every languid bark appears
To float along a burning sky!
Oh ! for the boat the angel gave6
To him, who in his heaven-ward flight,
Sail’d, o’er the sun’s aetherial wave,
To planet-isles of odorous light!
Sweet Venus, what a clime he found
Within thy orb’s ambrosial round7 !
this difficult navigation, with a skill and confidence which seem to astonish
some of the oldest sailors.
6	In Kircher’s “ Extatic Journey to Heaven,” Cosmiel, the genius of the
world, gives Theodidactus a boat of asbestos, with which he embarks into the
regions of the sun. “ Vides (says Cosmiel) hanc asbestinam naviculam com-
moditati tuse praeparatam.” Itinerar. 1. Dial. 1. Cap. 5. There are some
very strange fancies in this work of Kircher.
7	When the Genius of the world and his fellow-traveller arrive at the planet
Venus, they find an island of loveliness, full of odours and intelligences, where
angels preside, who shed the cosmetic influence of this planet over the earth;
There spring the breezes, rich and warm,
That pant around thy twilight car;
There angels dwell, so pure of form,
That each appears a living star8!
These are the sprites, oh radiant queen!
Thou send’st so often to the bed
Of her I love, with spell unseen,
Thy planet’s brightning balm to shed;
To make the eye’s enchantment clearer,
To give the cheek one rose-bud more,
And bid that flushing lip be dearer,
Which had been, oh! too dear before !
But, whither means the muse to roam ?
’Tis time to call the wanderer home .
Who could have ever thought to search her
Up in the clouds with Father Kircher ?
such being, according to astrologers, the “ vis influxiva” of Venus. When they
are in this part of the heavens, a casuistical question occurs to Theodidactus,
and he asks “Whether baptism maybe performed with the water of Venus?"—
“An aquis globi Venerie baptismus institui possit ?” to which the Genius
answers, “ Certainly.”
' This idea is Father Kircher’e. “ Tot animatos soles dixisses/’ Itinerar.
1. Dial. 1. Cap. δ.
So, health and love to all your mansion!
Long may the bowl that pleasures bloom in,
The flow of heart, the soul’s expansion,
Mirth and song your board illumine !
Fare you well—remember too,
When cups are flowing to the brim,
That here is one who drinks to you,
And oh !—as warmly drink to him.
POSTSCRIPT.
When next you see the black-ey'd Caty,
The loving, languid girl of Hayti9,
Whose finger so expertly plays
Amid the ribbon’s silken maze,
Just like Aurora, when she ties
A rainbow round the morning skies !
9 Among the West-Indian French at Norfolk, there are some very interesting
Saint-Domingo girls, who in the day sell millinery, &c. and at night assemble
in little cotilion parties, where they dance away the remembrance of their unfor·
tunate country, and forget the miseries which “ Les amis des noirs” brought
upon them.
Say, that I hope, when winter s o’er,
On Norfolk’s bank again to rove,
And then, shall search the ribbon-store
For some of Caty’s softest love.
I should not like the gloss were past,
Yet want it not entirely new;
But bright and strong enough to last
About—suppose a week or two.
However frail, however light,
’Twill do, at least, to wear at night:
And so you’ll tell our black-ey’d Caty,
The loving, languid girl of Hayti I
THE WEDDING RING.
TO
1801.
No—Lady! Lady! keep the ring;
Oh ! think, how many a future year,
Of placid smile and downy wing,
May sleep within its holy sphere!
Do not disturb their tranquil dream,
Though love hath ne’er the mystery warm’d,
Yet heav’n will send a soothing beam,
To bless the bond itself hath form’d.
But then, that eye, that burning eye !
Oh ! it doth ask, with magic power,
If heaven can ever bless the tie,
Where love inwreathes no genial flower!
Away, away, bewildering look!
Or all the boast of virtue's o'er;
Go—hie thee to the sage's book,
And learn from him to feel no more !
I eannot warn thee ; every touch,
That brings my pulses close to thine,
Tells me I want thy aid as much,
Oh ! quite as much, as thou dost mine!
Yet stay, dear love—one effort yet—
A moment turn those eyes away,
And let me, if I can, forget
The light that leads my soul astray!
Thou say'st, that we were born to meet,
That our hearts bear one common seal,
Oh Lady! think, how man's deceit
Can seem to sigh and feign to feel!
When, o'er thy face some gleam of thought,
Like day-beams through the morning air,
Hath gradual stole, and I have caiight
The feeling ere it kindled there :
The sympathy I then betray’d,
Per hap 8 was but the child of art;
The guile of one, who long hath play’d
With all these wily nets of heart.
Oh ! thou hast not my virgin vow;
Though few the years I yet have tolc(,
Canst thou believe I live till now,
With loveless heart or senses cold ?
No—many a throb of bliss and pain,
For many a maid my soul hath prov’d;
With some I wanton’d wild and vain,
While some I truly, dearly lov’d!
The cheek to thine I fondly lay,
To theirs hath been as fondly laid;
The words to thee I warmly say,
To them have been as warmly said.
Then, scorn at once a languid heart,
Which long hath lost its early spring;
Think of the pure, bright soul thou art,
And—keep the ring, oh! keep the ring.
Enough—now, turn thine eyes again;
What, still that look and still that sigh!
Dost thou not feel my counsel then ?
Oh! no, beloved!—nor do I.
While thus to mine thy bosom lies,
While thus our breaths commingling glow,
'Twere more than woman, to be wise,
’Twere more than man, to wish thee so!
Did we not love so true, so dear,
This lapse could never be forgiven;
But hearts so fond and lips so near—
Give me the ring, and now—Oh heaven!
LYING.
CHE CON LB LOR BUGIE PAJON DIVINI.
Mauro d9 Arcano.
I do confess, in many a sigh
My lips have breath’d you many a lie,
And who, with such delights in view,
Would lose them, for a lie or two ?
Nay—look not thus, with brow reproving
Lies are, my dear, the soul of loving!
If half we tell the girls were true,
If half we swear to think and do,
Were aught but lying’s bright illusion,
The world would be in strange confusion!
If ladies’ eyes were, every one,
As lovers swear, a radiant sun,
Astronomy should leave the skies,
To learn her lore in ladies’ eyes!
Oh no!—believe me, lovely girl,
When nature turns your teeth to pearl,
Your neck to snow, your eyes to fire,
Your yellow locks to golden wire,
Then, only then, can heaven decree,
That you should live for only me,
Or I for you, as night and morn,
WeVe swearing kist, and kissing sworn !
And now, my gentle hints to clear,
For once, III tell you truth, my dear!
Whenever you may chance to meet
A loving youth, whose love is sweet,
Long as you’re false and he believes you,
Long as you trust and he deceives you,
So long the blissful bond endures;
And while he lies, his heart is your’s :
But oh ! you’ve wholly lost the youth,
The instant that he tells you truth!
TO
ON SEEING HER WITH A WHITE VEIL AND A RICH GIRDLE.
Put off the vestal veil, nor oh!
Let weeping angels view it;
Your cheeks belie its virgin snow,
And blush repenting through it.
Put off the fatal zone you wear;
The lucid gems around it
Are tears, that fell from Virtue there,
The hour that Love unbound it.
THE
RESEMBLANCE.
vo cercaod' io
Donna, quant’ έ poesibile, in altrai
La desiata vostra forma vera.
Petrarc. Sonett. 14.
Yfee, if ’twere any common love,
That led my pliant heart astray,
I grant, there’s not a power above
Could wipe the faithless crime away!
But, ’twas my doom to err with one
In every look so like to thee,
That oh! beneath the blessed sun,
So fair there are but thou and she!
Whate’er may be her angel birth,
She was thy lovely, perfect twin,
And wore the only shape on earth,
That could have charm’d my soul to sin I
Your eyes !—the eyes of languid doves
Were never half so like each other!
The glances of the baby loves
Resemble less their warm-ey’d mother!
Her lip !—oh, call me not false-hearted,
When such a lip I fondly prest;
TVas Love some melting cherry parted,
Gave thee half and her the rest!
And when, with all thy murmuring tone,
They sued half-open to be kist,
I could as soon resist thine own,
And them, heaven knows! I ne'er resist.
Then, scorn me not, though false I be,
Twas love that wak’d the dear excess;
My heart had been more true to thee,
Had mine eye priz’d thy beauty less!
hen I lov’d you, I can’t but allow
I had many an exquisite minute;
But the scorn that I feel for you now
Hath even more luxury in it!
Thus, whether we’re on or we’re off,
Some witchery seems to await you;
To love you is pleasant enough,
And oh! ’tis delicious to hate you!
FROM THE
GREEK OF MELEAGER1.
Fill high the cup with liquid flame,
And speak my Heliodora's name!
Repeat its magic o'er and o'er,
And let the sound my lips adore,
Sweeten the breeze, and mingling swim
On every bowl's voluptuous brim!
Give me the wreath that withers there,
It was but last delicious night,
It hung upon her wavy hair,
And caught her eyes' reflected light!
1 Eκαι παλιν enre, παλιν, παλιν9 ϋΚιοΰωξας
Εητι, (τυν αχξητω το γλυχ,ν μισγ ονομα.
Κat μοι τον βξί%$ίντα μυξ<χς χαι %$ιζον sovτα,
Μναμο<τυνον χανας, αμψιτιΒει ?εφανον'
Ααχζυίΐ φιλεξαϊον /5« ξοδον9 *ηχα x£tvav
Αλλο0< xV ΧοΚποις $μ*τίζοις eroget.
Brunck. Analect. Tom. I. p. 28.
Oh ! haste, and twine it round my brow;
It breathes of Heliodora now!
The loving rose-bud drops a tear,
To see the nymph no longer here,
No longer, where she used to lie,
Close to my heart’s devoted sigh!

ODES
TO
ΝΕΑ;
WRITTEN AT BERMUDA.
ΝΕΑ TTPANNEI.
Euripid. Medea, v. 067.
L4
Digitized by
Google
Nay, tempt me not to love again,
There was a time when love was sweet;
Dear Nea ! had I known thee then,
Our souls had not been slow to meet!
But oh ! this weary heart hath run,
So many a time, the rounds of pain,
Not ev’n for thee, thou lovely one !
Would I endure such pangs again.
If there be climes, where never yet
The print of beauty’s foot was set,
Where man may pass his loveless nights,
Unfeverd by her false delights,
Thither my wounded soul would fly,
Where rosy cheek or radiant eye
Should bring no . more their bliss, their pain,
Or fetter me to earth again!
Dear absent girl! whose eyes of light,
Though little priz’d when all my own,
Now float before me, soft and bright
As when they first enamouring shone !
How many hours of idle waste,
Within those witching arms embrac’d,
Unmindful of the fleeting day,
Have I dissolv’d life’s dream away!
O	bloom of time profusely shed !
O	moments! simply, vainly fled,
Yet sweetly too—for love perfum’d
The flame which thus my life consum’d ;
And brilliant was the chain of flowers,
In which he led my victim-hours!
Say, Nea dear! could’st thou, like her,
When warm to feel and quick to err,
Of loving fond, of roving fonder,
My thoughtless soul might wish to wander,
Could’st thou, like her, the wish reclaim,
Endearing still, reproaching never,
Till all my heart should burn with shame,
And be thy own more fix’d than ever ?
No—no—on earth there’s only she,
So long could bind such folly fast;
None, none could make, but only me,
Such pure perfection false at last!
Nea. ! the heart which she forsook,
For thee were but a worthless shrine—
Go, lovely girl, that angel look
Must thrill a soul more pure than mine.
Oh! thou shalt be all else to me,
That heart can feel or tongue can feign;
Γ11 praise, admire and worship thee,
But must not, dare not love again.
. .	■	■	—— ■ TALE ITER OMNE CAVE.
Propert. Lib. ♦. EUg. 8.
X pray you, let us roam no more
Along that wild and lonely shore,
Where late we thoughtless stray’d;
’Twas not for us, whom heaven intends
To be no more than simple friends,
Such lonely walks were made.
That little Bay, where winding in
From ocean’s rude and angry din,
(As lovers steal to bliss)
The billows kiss the shore, and then
Flow calmly to the deep again,
As though they did not kiss!
Remember, o’er its circling flood
In what a dangerous dream we stood—
The silent sea before us,
Around us, all the gloom of grove,
That e’er was spread for guilt or love,
No eye but nature’s o’er us!
I saw you blush, you felt me tremble,
In vain would formal art dissemble
All that we wish’d and thought;
’Twas more than tongue could dare reveal,
Twas more than virtue ought to feel,
But all that passion ought!
I stoop’d to cull, with faltering hand,
A shell that, on the golden sand,
Before us faintly gleam’d;
I rais'd it to your lips of dew,
You kist the shell, I kist it too—
Good heaven! how sweet it seem’d!
Oh! trust me, ’twas a place, an hour,
The worst that e’er temptation’s power
Could tangle me or you in!
Sweet Nea ! let us roam no more
Along that wild and lonely shore,
Such walks will be our ruin!
Sant («altationee soil.) causa mali; si tx re ogay γιγηται « egav, multo magis e contacta,
complexu, baiiia quae ia saltationibus usitata sunt; etiam irritantur ad &c. &c.
AltUdius, in DcipnotophitticU.
You read it in my languid eyes,
And there alone should love be read;
You hear me say it all in sighs,
And thus alone should love be said.
Then dread no more; I will not speak;
Although my heart to anguish thrill,
Γ11 spare the burning of your cheek,
And look it all in silence still!
Heard you the wish I dard to name,
To murmur on that luckless night,
When passion broke the bonds of shame,
And love grew madness in your si ght?
Divinely through the graceful dance,
You seem'd to float in silent song,
Bending to earth that beamy glance,
As if to light your steps along!
Oh! how could others dare to touch
That hallow'd form with hand so free,
When but to look was bliss too much,
Too rare for all but heaven and me!
With smiling eyes, that little thought
How fatal were the beams they threw,
My trembling hands you lightly caught,
And round me, like a spirit, flew.
Heedless of all, I wildly turn'd,
My soul forgot—nor oh! condemn,
That when such eyes before me burn’d,
My soul forgot all eyes but them !
I dar'd to speak in sobs of bliss,
Rapture of every thought bereft me,
I would have clasp'd you—oh, even this!—
But, with a bound, you blushing left me.
Forget, forget that night's offence,
Forgive it, if alas ! you can;
'Twas love, ’twas passion—soul and sense—
'Twas all the best and worst of man!
That moment, did the mingled eyes
Of heaven and earth my madness view,
I should have seen, through earth and skies,
But you alone, but only you!
Did not a frown from you reprove,
Myriads of eyes to me were none;
I should have—oh my only love !
My life! what should I not have done?
A
DREAM OF ANTIQUITY.
I just had turn'd the classic page,
And trac'd that happy period oyer,
When love could warm the proudest sage,
And wisdom grace the tenderest lover I
Before I laid me down to sleep,
Upon the bank awhile I stood,
And saw the vestal planet weep
Her tears of light on Ariel's flood.
My heart was full of fancy's dream,
And, as I watch'd the playful stream,
Entangling in its net of smiles
So fair a group of elfin isles,
I felt as if the scenery there
Were lighted by a Grecian sky—
As if I breath'd the blissful air
That yet was warm with Sappho's sigh!
And now, the downy hand of rest
Her signet on my eyes imprest,
And still the bright and balmy spell,
Like star-dew, o'er my fancy fell!
I thought that, all enrapt, I stray'd
Through that serene, luxurious shade1,
Where Epicurus taught the Loves
To polish virtue's native brightness,
Just &s, they say, the beak of doves
Can give to pearls a smoother whiteness2!
1 Gassendi thinks that the gardens, which Pausanias mentions, in his first
Book, were those of Epicurus; and Stuart says, in his Antiquities of Athens,
« Near this convent (the convent of Hagios Asomatos) is the place called
at present Kepoi, or the Gardens; and Ampelos Kepos, or the Vineyard
Garden; these were probably the gardens which Pausanias visited.” Chap. ii.
Vol. I.
*	This method of polishing pearls, by leaving them awhile to be played with
by doves, is recorded by the fanciful Card anus, de Rerum Varietat. Lib. vii.
cap. 34.
Twas one of those delicious nights
So common in the climes of Greece,
When day withdraws but half its lights,
And all is moonshine, balm and peace!
And thou wert there, my own belov’d!
And dearly by thy side I rov’d
Through many a temple’s reverend gloom,
And many a bower’s seductive bloom,
Where beauty blush’d and wisdom taught,
Where lovers sigh’d and sages thought,
Where hearts might feel or heads discern,
And all was form’d to soothe or move,
To make the dullest love to learn,
To make the coldest learn to love!
And now the fairy path-way seem’d
To lead us through enchanted ground,
Where all that bard has ever dream’d
Of love or luxury bloom’d around!
Oh ! ’twas a bright, bewildering scene—
Along the alley’s deepening green
Soft lamps, that hung like burning flowers,
And scented and illum’d the bowers,
Seem’d, as to him, who darkling roves
Amid the lone Hercynian groves,
Appear the countless birds of light)
That sparkle in the leaves at night,
And from their wings diffase a ray
Along the travellers weary way3!
'Twas light of that mysterious kind,
Through which the soul is doom'd to roam*
When it has left this world behind,
And gone to seek its heavenly home !
And, Nea, thou didst look and move,
Like any blooming soul of bliss,
That wanders to its home above
Through mild and shadowy light like this!
But now, methought, we stole along
Through halls of more voluptuous glory
Than ever liv’d in Teian song,
Or wanton’d in Milesian story 4!
*	In Hercynio Germanise saltu inusitata genera alitum accepimus, quarum
plumae, ignium modo, colluceant noctibus. Plin. Lib. x. cap. 47.
*	The Milesiacs, or Milesian fables, had their origin in Miletus, a luxurious
town of Ionia. Aristides was the most celebrated author of these licentious
fictions. See Plutarch (in Crasso) who calls them αχολατα fi&Xtu,
And nymphs were there, whose very eyes
Seem’d almost to exhale in sighs;
Whose every little ringlet thrill’d,
As if with soul and passion fill’d!
Some flew, with amber cups, around,
Shedding the flowery wines of Crete *
And, as they pass’d with youthful bound,
The onyx shone beneath their feet6!
While others, waving arms of snow
Entwin’d by snakes of burnish’d gold7,
And shewing limbs, as loth to shew,
Through many a thin Tarentian fold®,
9 ** Some of the Cretan wines, which Athenaeus calls οίνος αν$οσ-[χαας, from
their fragrancy resembling that of the finest flowers.” Barry on Wines, chap. vii.
*	It appears that in very splendid mansions, the floor or pavement was fre-
quently of onyx. Thus Martial. “ Calcatusque tuo sub pede lucet onyx.”
Epig. 50. Lib. xii.
7	Bracelets of this shape were a favourite ornament among the women of
antiquity. Ό/ επιχαξπιοι όψεις nat ai %gvcrai πεΰαι Θαώος χαι Αξίταγοξας xat
Λαώος φαξ idonea. Philostrat. Epist. xl. Lucian too tells us of the βξαχιοκτι
ίζαχοντες. See his Amores, where he describes the dressing-room of a Grecian
lady, and we find the “ silver vase,” the rouge, the tooth-powder, and all the
** mystic order” of a modern toilet.
*	Ταξχντινώιον, διαφανές αώορχ, ωκγΛασγχΐνον anτο της Ύαξαηο/ων γχητεως tuu
ψιφης. Pollux.
Glided along the festal ring
With vases, all respiring spring,
Where roses lay, in languor breathing,
And the young bee-grape9, round them wreathing,
Hung on their blushes warm and meek,
Like curls upon a rosy cheek!
Oh, Nea ! why did morning break
The spell that so divinely bound me ?
Why did I wake ? how could I wake
With thee my own and heaven around me!
9 Apiana, mentioned by Pliny, Lib. xiv. and “ now called the Muscatell
(a muscarum telis)” says Pancirollus, Book i. Sect. 1. Chap. 17.
Well—peace to thy heart, though another’s it be,
And health to thy cheek, though it bloom not for me !
To-morrow, I sail for those cinnamon groves *,
Where nightly the ghost of the Carribee roves,
1 When I wrote these lines, I had some idea of leaving Bermuda and visiting
the West-India Islands.
Pinkerton has said that “ a good history and description of the Bermudas
might afford a pleasing addition to the geopraphical library;" but there cer-
tainly are not materials for such a work. The island, since the time of its
discovery, has experienced so very few vicissitudes, the people have been so in-
dolent, and their trade so limited, that there is but little which the historian
could amplify into importancej and, with respect to the natural productions
of the country, the few which the inhabitants can be induced to cultivate are
50 common in the West Indies, that they have been described by every
naturalist, who has written any account of those islands.
The women of Bermuda, though not generally handsome, have an affection-
ate languor in their look and manner, which is always interesting. What the
French imply by their epithet aimante seems very much the character of the
young Bermudian girls—that predisposition to loving, which, without being
awakened by any particular object, diffuses itself through the general manner
in a tone of tenderness which never fails to fascinate. The men of the island,
And, far from thine eye, oh ! perhaps, I may yet
Its seduction forgive and its splendour forget!
Farewell to Bermuda2, and long may the bloom
Of the lemon and myrtle its vallies perfume;
May spring to eternity hallow the shade,
Where Ariel has warbled and Waller has stray'd!
And thou—when, at dawn, thou shalt happen to roam
Through the lime-cover’d alley that leads to thy home,
Where oft, when the dance and the revel were done,
And the stars were beginning to fade in the sun,
I have led thee along, and have told by the way
What my heart all the night had been burning to say—
Oh ! think of the past—give a sigh to those times,
And a blessing for me to that alley of limes!
I confess, are not very civilized; and the old philosopher, who imagined that,
after this life, men would be changed into mules and women into turtle-doves,
would find the metamorphosis in some degree anticipated at Bermuda.
*	The inhabitants pronounce the name as if it were written Bermooda. See
the commentators on the words “ still-vex’d Bermoothes,” in the Tempest.—
I wonder it did not occur to some of those all-reading gentlemen that, possibly,
the discoverer of this “ island of hogs and devils” might have been no less a
personage than the great John Bermudez, who, about the same period (the
beginning of the sixteenth century) was sent Patriarch of the Latin Church to
Ethiopia, and has left us most wonderful stories of the Amazons and the Griffins
which he encountered. Travels of the Jesuits, Vol. I. I am afraid however
sit would take the Patriarch rather too much out of his way.
If I were yonder wave, my dear,
And thou the isle it clasps around,
I would not let a foot come near
My land of bliss, my fairy ground!
If I were yonder conch of gold, '
And thou the pearl within it plac’d,
I would not let an eye behold
The sacred gem my arms embrac’d!
If I were yonder orange-tree,
And thou the blossom blooming there,
I would not yield a breath of thee,
To scent the most imploring air!
Oh ! bend not o'er the water s brink,
Give not the wave that rosy sigh,
JNor let its burning mirror drink
The soft reflection of thine eye.
That glossy hair, that glowing cheek
Upon the billows pour their beam
So warmly, that my soul could seek
Its Nea in the painted stream.
The painted stream my chilly grave
And nuptial bed at once may be,
I'll wed thee in that mimic wave,
And die upon the shade of thee !
Behold the leafy mangrove, bending
O'er the Waters blue and bright,
Like Nea's silky lashes, lending
Shadow to her eyes of light J
Oh, my belov’d ! wheree’er I turn,
Some trace of thee enchants mine eyes,
In every star thy glances burn,
Thy blush on every flowret lies.
But then thy breath!—not all the fire,
That lights the lone SemendaV death
In eastern climes, could e'er respire
An odour like thy dulcet breath !
I pray thee, on those lips of thine
To wear this rosy leaf for me,
And breathe of something not divine,
Since nothing human breathes of thee!
All other charms of thine I meet
In nature, but thy sigh alone;
Then take, oh ! take, though not so swset,
The breath of rose# for Inline own!
So, while I walk the flowery groye,
The bud that gives, through jnoroing dew,
The lustre of the lip? I love,
May seem to give their perfume tpo !
1 Referant tamen qoidam in interiore India avem ease, nomine Semendam
&c. Cardan. 10 de Subtilitat. Caesar Scaliger seems to think Semenda but
another name for the Phoenix. Exercitat. 233.
OK
SEEING AN INFANT IN NEA'S ARMS.
The first ambrosial child of bliss,
That Psyche to her bosom prest,
Was not a brighter babe than this,
Nor blush’d upon a lovelier breast!
His little snow-white fingers, straying
Along her lip’s luxuriant flower,
Look’d like a flight of ring-doves playing,
Silvery, mid a roseate bower!
And when, to shade the playful boy,
Her dark hair fell, in mazes bright,
Oh! 'twas a type of stolen joy,
Twas love beneath the veil of night!
Soft as she smil’d, he smil’d again;
They seem’d so kindred in their charms
That one might think, the babe had then
Just budded in her blooming arms!
He look'd like something form’d of air,
Which she had utter’d in a sigh;
Like some young spirit, resting there,
That late had wander’d from her eye !
SNOW-SPIRIT.
TU POTES INSOLITAS, CYNTHIA, FERRE NIVES ?
Propert. Lib. 1. Eleg. 8.
No, ne'er did the wave in its element steep
An island of lovelier charms;
It blooms in the giant embrace of the deep,
Like Hebe in Hercules’ arms!
The tint of your bowers is balm to the eye,
Their melody balm to the ear;
But the fiery planet of day is too nigh,
And the Snow-Spirit never comes here!
The down from his wing is as white, as the pearl
Thy lips for their cabinet stole,
And it falls on the green earth as melting, my girl,
As a murmur of thine on the soul!
Oh! fly to the clime, where he pillows the death,
As he cradles the birth of the year;
Bright are your bowers and balmy their breath,
But the Snow-Spirit cannot come here !
How sweet to behold him, when borne on the gale,
And brightening the bosom of morn,
He flings, like the priest of Diana, a veil
O'er the brow of each virginal thorn!
Yet think not, the veil he so chillingly casts,
Is the veil of a vestal severe;
No, no, thou wilt see, what a moment it lasts,
Should the Snow-Spirit ever come here!
But fly to his region—lay open thy zone,
And he'll weep all his brilliancy dim,
To think that a bosom, as white as his own,
Should not melt in the day-beam like him!
Oh! lovely the print of those delicate feet
O'er his luminous path will appear—
Fly! my beloved ! this island is sweet,
But the Snow-Spirit cannot come here!
£νταυθα 9ι xabutfpufffeu -ημιν. χαι o', η j»r ονομα, τη νησω, βκ ο»ίβ· Xgocif ί*or «’fOf y*
t/M ονομαζατο.
PkUottrat. Icon. 17. Lib. 2.
I stole along the flowery bank,
While many abending sea-grape1 drank
The sprinkle of the feathery oar
That wing’d me round this fairy shore!
’Twas noon; and every orange bud
Hung languid o’er the crystal flood,
Faint as the lids of maiden eyes
Beneath a lover s burning sighs!
Oh for a naiad’s sparry bower,
To shade me in that glowing hour!
1 The sea-side or mangrove grape, a native of the West Indies.
A little dove, of milky hue,
Before me from a plantain flew,
And, light along the waters brim,
I steer'd my gentle bark by him;
For fancy told me, love had sent
This snowy bird of blandishment,
To lead me, where my soul should meet—
I knew not what, but something sweet!
Blest be the little pilot dove!
He had indeed been sent by love,
To guide me to a scene so dear,
As fate allows but seldom here;
One of those rare and brilliant hours,
Which, like the aloe's1 lingering flowers,
May blossom to the eye of man
But once in all his weary span!
Just where the margin's opening shade
A vista from the waters made,
1 The Agave. I know that this is an erroneous idea, but it is quite true
enough for poetry. Plato, I think, allows a poet to be “ three removes from
truthτξηατος omo της αληΒειας.
My bird repos'd his silver plume
Upon a rich banana's bloom.
Oh vision bright! oh spirit fair!
What spell, what magic rais'd her there?
'Twas Nea ! slumbering calm and mild,
And bloomy as the dimpled child,
Whose spirit in elysium keeps
Its playful sabbath, while he sleeps 1
The broad banana's green embrace
Hung shadowy round each tranquil grace;
One little beam alone could win
The leaves to let it wander in,
And, stealing over all her charms,
From lip to cheek, from neck to arms.
It glanc'd around a fiery kiss,
All trembling, as it went, with bliss I
Her eyelid’s black and silken fringe
Lay on her cheek, of vermil tinge,
Like the first ebon cloud, that closes
Dark on evening’s heaven of roses!
Her glances, though in slumber hid,
Seem'd glowing through their ivory lid,
And o'er her lips reflecting dew
A soft and liquid lustre threw,
Such as, declining dim and faint,
The lamp of some beloved saint
Doth shed upon a flowery wreath,
Which pious hands have hung beneath f
Was ever witchery half so sweet!
Think, think how all my pulses beat,
As o'er the rustling bank I stole—
Oh! you, that know the lover's soul,
It is for you to dream the bliss,
The tremblings of an hour like this!
ON THE LOSS OF
A LETTER INTENDED FOR NEA.
Oh ! it was fill'd with words of flame,
With all the wishes wild and dear,
Which love may write, but dares not name,
Which woman reads, but must not hear!
Of many a nightly dream it told,
When all that chills the heart by day,
The worldly doubt, the caution cold,
In fancy's fire dissolve away!
When soul and soul divinely meet,
Free from the senses' guilty shame,
And mingle in a sigh so sweet,
As virtue’s self would blush to blame!
How could he lose such tender words ?
Words! that, of themselves, should spring
To Nea’s ear, like panting birds,
With heart and soul upon their wing !
Oh! fancy what they dar’d to speak;
Think all a virgin’s shame can dread,
Nor pause, until thy conscious cheek
Shall burn with thinking all they said !
And I shall feign, shall fancy too
Some dear reply thou might’st have giv’n;
Shall make that lip distill its dew
In promise bland and hopes of heaven!
Shall think it tells of future days,
When the averted cheek will turn,
When eye with eye shall mingle rays,
And lip to lip shall closely burn!—
Ah! if this flattery is not thine,
If colder hope thy answer brings,
I’ll wish thy words were lost like mine,
Since I can dream such dearer things!
I found her notr—the chamber seem’d
Like some divinely haunted place,
Where fairy forms had lately beam'd,
And left behind their odorous trace !
It felt, as if her lips had shed
A sigh around her, ere she fled,
Which hung, as on a melting lute,
When all the silver chords are mute,
There lingers still a trembling breath
After the note’s luxurious death,
A shade of song, a spirit air
Of melodies which had been there!
I	saw the web, which, all the day,
Had floated o’er her cheek of rose;
I	saw the couch, where late she lay
In languor of divine repose!
And I could trace the hallow’d print
Her limbs had left, as pure and warm,
As if ’twere done in rapture’s mint,
And love himself had stamp’d the form!
Oh Nea ! Nea ! where wert thou?
In pity fly not thus from me;
Thou art my life, my essence now,
And my soul dies of wanting thee !
A KISS A L’ANTIQUE.
*
Behold, my love, the curious gem
Within this simple ring of gold;
’Tis hallow’d by the touch of them
Who liv’d in classic hours of old.
Some fair Athenian girl, perhaps,
Upon her hand this gem display’d,
Nor thought that time’s eternal lapse
Should see it grace a lovelier maid!
Look, darling, what a sweet design!
The more we gaze, it charms the more s
Come,—closer bring that cheek to mine,
And trace with me its beauties o’er.
Thou see’st, it is a simple youth
By some enamour’d nymph embrac’d—
Look, Nea love! and say in sooth
Is not her hand most dearly plac’d ?
Upon his curled head behind
It seems in careless play to lie1,
Yet presses gently, half inclin’d
To bring his lip of nectar nigh !
Oh happy maid! too happy boy ^
The one so fond and faintly loath,
The other yielding slow to joy—
Oh, rare indeed, but blissful both!
Imagine, love, that I am he,
And just as warm as he is chilling;
Imagine too that thou art she,
But quite as cold, as she is willing:
1 Somewhat like the fine symplegma of Cupid and Psyche at Florence, in
which the position of Psyche's hand is most beautifully affectionate. See the
Museum Florentinum, Tom. ii. Tab. 43, 44. I know of very few subjects in
which poetry could be more interestingly employed, than in illustrating Some
of the ancient statues and gems.
So may we try the graceful way
In which their gentle arms are twin d,
And thus, like her, my hand I lay
Upon thy wreathed hair behind ;
And thus I feel thee breathing sweet,
As slow to mine thy head I move;
And thus our lips together meet,
And—thus I kiss thee—oh my love Ϊ
.Χιβ&νοτω μχαγβυ, Sri ΜολλΌμ*νΜ iuffouvH.
Aristot. Rhetor. Lib. iii. Cap. 4.
There’s not a look, a word of thine
My soul hath e’er forgot;
Thou ne’er hast bid a ringlet shine,
Nor giv’n thy locks one graceful twine
Which I remember not!
There never yet a murmur fell
From that beguiling tongue,
Which did not, with a lingering spell,
Upon my charmed senses dwell,
Like something heaven had sung!
Ab ! that I could, at once, forget
All, all that haunts me so—
And yet, thou witching girl!—and yet,
To die were sweeter, than to let
The lov'd remembrance go !
No; if this slighted heart must see
Its faithful pulse decay,
Oh ! let it die, remembering thee,
And, like the burnt aroma, be
Consum'd in sweets away!
EPISTLE V.
TO
JOSEPH ATKINSON, ESQ.
FROM BERMUDA.
March.
“ The day-light is gone—but, before we depart,
“ Here's a brimmer of love to the friend of my heart,
“ To the friend who himself, is a chalice, a bowl
“ In which Heaven hath pour d a rich bumper of soulΓ
’Twas thus, by the shade of a ealabash-tree,
With a few, who could feel and remember like me,
The charm, that to sweeten my goblet I threw,
Was a sigh to the past ai»4 a blessing on you!
Oh ! say, do you thus, in the luminous hour
Of wine and of wit, when the heart is in flower
And shoots from the lip, under Bacchus’s dew,
In blossoms of thought ever springing and new!
Do you sometimes remember, and hallow the brim
Of your cup with a sigh, as you crown it to him,
Who is lonely and sad in these vallies so fair,
And would pine in elysium, if friends were not there!
Last night, when we came from the calabash-tree,
When my limbs were at rest and my spirit was free,
The glow of the grape and the dreams of the day
Put the magical springs of my fancy in play,
And oh!—such a vision as haunted me then,
I could slumber for ages to witness again!
The many I like, and the few I adore,
The friends, who were dear and beloved before,
But never till now so beloved and dear,
At the call of my fancy surrounded me here!
Soon, soon did the flattering spell of their smile
To a paradise brighten the blest little isle;
Serener the wave, as they look’d on it, flow’d,
And warmer the rose, as they gather’d it, glow’d!
Not the vallies Hera&an (though water’d by rills
Of the pearliest flow, from those pastoral hills1»
Where the song of the shepherd, primaeval and wild,
Was taught to the nymphs by their mystical child,)
Could display such a bloom of delight, as was given
By the magic of love to this miniature heaven I
Oh magic of love ί unembellish'd by you,
Has the garden a blush or the herbage a hue?
Or blooms there a prospect in nature or art,
Like the vista that shines through the eye to the heart I
Alas ! that a vision so happy should fade f
That, when morning around me in brilliancy play’d,
The rose and the stream I had thought of at night
Should still be before me, unfadingly bright;
While the friends, who had seem’d to hang over the stream,
And to gather the roses, had fled with my dream!
1 Mountains of Sicily, upon which Daphnis, the first inventor of bucolic
poetry, was nursed by the nymphs. See the lively description of these mountains
in Diodorus Siculus, Lib. iv. Ήςαια γαξ οξη κατα τψ Σίχελιαν estv9 λ ψοκτι
χαλλει χ. τ. λ.
But see, through the harbour, in floating array,
The bark that must carry these pages away2,
Impatiently flutters her wing to the wind,
And will soon leave the bowers of Ariel behind !
What billows, what gales is she fated to prove,
Ere she sleep in the lee of the land that I love!
Yet pleasant the swell of those billows would be,
And the sound of those gales would be music to me!
Not the tranquillest air that the winds ever blew,
Not the silvery lapse of the summer-eve dew
Were as sweet as the breeze, or as bright as the foam
Of the wave, that would carry your wanderer home!
s A ship, ready to sail for England.
LOYE AND REASON.
u Quand rhorame commence a raisonner, il cesse de sentir.w
i. J. ROUSSEAU l.
’Twas in the summer-time, so sweet,
When hearts and flowers are both in season,
That—who, of all the world, should meet,
One early dawn, but Love and Reason!
Love told his dream of yester-night,
While Reason talk’d about the weather;
The morn, in sooth, was fair and bright,
And on they took their way together.
1 Quoted somewhere in St. Pierre’s Etudes de la Nature.

The boy in many a gambol flew,
While Reason, like a Juno stalk’d,
And from her portly figure threw
A lengthen’d shadow, as she walk’d.
No wonder Love, as on they past,
Should find that sunny morning chill,
For still the shadow Reason cast
Fell on the boy, and cool’d him still.
In vain he tried his wings to warm,
Or find a path-way, not so dim,
For still the maid’s gigantic form
Would pass between the sun and him!
“ This must not be,” said little Love—
“ The sun was made for more than you.”
So, turning through a myrtle grove,
He bid the portly nymph adieu!
Now gaily roves the laughing ^>oy
O’er many a mead, by jnany a stream;
In every breeze inhaling joy,
And drinking bliss in every beam.
From all the gardens, all the bowers,
He cull'd the many sweets they shaded,
And ate the fruits and smell’d the flowers,
Till taste was gone and odour faded!
But now the sun, in pomp of noon,
Look’d blazing o'er the parched plains;
Alas ! the boy grew languid soon,
And fever thrill’d through all his veins!
The dew forsook his baby brow,
No more with vivid bloom he smil'd—
Oh ! where was tranquil Reason now,
To cast her shadow o'er the child ?
Beneath a green and aged palm,
His foot at length for shelter turning,
He saw the nymph reclining calm,
With brow as cool, as his was burning!
“ Oh ! take me to that bosom cold/*
In murmurs at her feet he said;
And Reason op'd her garment’s fold,
And flung it round his fever'd head.
He felt her bosom’s icy touch,
And soon it lull’d his pulse to rest;
For ah ! the chill was quite too much,
And Love expir’d on Reason’s breast!
" Errare malo cum Platone, qaam cum aliia recti sentire.”
CICERO.
“ I would rather think wrongly with Plato, than rightly with any one elee.M
1802.
Fanny, my love, we ne’er were sages,
But, trust me, all that Tully’s zeal
Express’d for Plato’s glowing pages,
All that, and more, for thee I feel!
Whate’er the heartless world decree,
Howe’er unfeeling prudes condemn,
Fanny !—I’d rather sin with thee,
Than live and die a saint with them!
Nay, do not weep, my Fanny dear!
While in these arms you lie,
The world hath not a wish, a fear,
That ought to claim one precious tear
From that beloved eye !
The world !—ah Fanny ! love must shun
The path where many rove;
One bosom to recline upon,
One heart, to be his only-one,
Are quite enough for love !
What can we wish, that is not here
Between your arms and mine ?
Is there, on earth, a space so dear,
As that within the blessed sphere
Two loving arms entwine ?
For me, there's not a lock of jet
Along your temples curl'd,
Within whose glossy, tangling net,
My soul doth not, at once, forget
All, all the worthless world!
'Tis in your eyes, my sweetest love!
My only worlds I see;
Let but their orbs in sunshine move,
And earth below and skies above
May frown or smile for me!
THE
SNAKE.
1801.
My love and I, the other day,
Within a myrtle arbour lay,
When near us, from a rosy bed,
A little Snake put forth its head.
“ See,” said the maid, with laughing eyes—
“ Yonder the fatal emblem lies!
“ Who could expect such hidden harm
“ Beneath the rose’s velvet charm ?”
Never did moral thought occur
In more unlucky hour than this;
Tor oh ! I just was leading her,
To talk of love and think of bliss.
I rose to kill the snake, but she
In pity pray’d, it might not be.
“ No,” said the girl—and many a spark
Flash’d from her eye-lid, as she said it—
“ Under the rose, or in the dark,
“ One might, perhaps, have cause to dread it;
“ But when its wicked eyes appear,
“ And when we know, for what they wink so,
“ One must be very simple, dear,
“ To let it sting one—don’t you think so?”
QUANTUM EST QUOD DESIT !
Ovid. Metam. Lib· Γχ· γ. 559*
’Tw as a new feeling—something more
Than we had dar’d to own before,
Which then we hid not;
We saw it in each other’s eye,
And wish’d, in every broken sigh
To speak, but did not!
She felt my lips impassion’d touch;
’Twas the first time I dar’d so much,
And yet, she chid not;
But whisper’d o’er my burning brow,
“ Oh! do you doubt I love you now ?”
Sweet soul! I did not!
Warmly I felt her bosom thrill,
I prest it closer, closer still,
Though gently bid not;
Till—oh ! the world hath seldom heard
Of lovers, who so nearly err’d,
And yet who—did not!
ASPASIA.
’Twas in the fair Aspasia’s bower,
That Love and Learning, many an hour,
In dalliance met, and Learning smil'd
With rapture on the playful child,
Who wanton stole, to find his nest
Within a fold of Learning’s vest!
There, as the listening statesman hung
In transport on Aspasia’s tongue,
The destinies of Athens took
Their colour from Aspasia’s look.
Oh happy time ! when laws of state,
When all that rul’d the country’s fate,
Its glory, quiet, or alarms,
Was plann’d between two snowy arms!
Sweet times ! you could not always last—
And yet, oh ! yet, you are not past;
Though we have lost the sacred mould,
In which their men were cast of old,
Woman, dear woman, still the same,
While lips are balm and looks are flame,
While man possesses heart or eyes,
Woman’s bright empire never dies!
Fanny, my love, they ne’er shall say,
That beauty’s charm hath pass’d away;
No—give the universe a soul
Attun’d to woman’s soft controul,
And Fanny hath the charm, the skill,
To wield a universe at will!
THE
GRECIAN GIRL'S DREAM OF THE BLESSED ISLANDS*.
TO HER LOVER.
...................... %ire καλο?
ΤΙν&αγοξΐjf, Woi r* χο£ον στηξίζαν Βξωϊΐς.
Απόλλων ιτζξΐ Πλωτινν. Oracul. Metric. a Joan. Opsop. collecta.
Was it the moon, or was it morning's ray,
That call'd thee, dearest, from these arms away ?
I linger'd still, in all the murmuring rest,
The languor of a soul too richly blest!
1 It was imagined by some of the antients that there is an ethereal ocean
above us, and that the sun and moon are two floating, luminous islands, in
which the spirits of the blest reside. Accordingly we find that the word
fixfayof was sometimes synonymous with αηξ, and death was not unfrequently
called Clxeavoto ποξος, or “ the passage of the ocean ”
Upon my breath the sigh yet faintly hung;
Thy name yet died in whispers o’er my tongue;
I heard thy lyre, which thou hadst left behind,
In amorous converse with the breathing wind;
Quick to my heart I prest the shell divine,
And, with a lip yet glowing warm from thine,
I kist its every chord, while every kiss
Shed o’er the chord some dewy print of bliss»
Then soft to thee I touch’d the fervid lyre,
Which told such melodies, such notes of fire
As none but chords, that drank the burning dews
Of kisses dear as ours, could e’er diffuse!
Oh love ! how blissful is the bland repose,
That soothing follows upon rapture’s close,
Like a soft twilight, o’er the mind to shed
Mild melting traces of the transport fled !
While thus I lay, in this voluptuous calm,
A drowsy languor steep’d my eyes in balm,
Upon my lap the lyre in murmurs fell,
While, faintly wandering o’er its silver shell,
My fingers sooii their own sweet requiem play’d,
And slept in music which themselves had made!
Then, then, my Theon, what a heavenly dream 1—
I saw two spirits, on the lunar beam,
Two winged boys, descending from above,
And gliding to my bower with looks of love.
Like the young genii, who repose their wings
All day in Amatha’s luxurious springs2,
And rise at midnight, from the tepid rill
To cool their plumes upon some moon-light hill!
Soft o’er my brow, which kindled with their sighs,
Awhile they play’d; then gliding through my eyes,
(Where the bright babies, for a moment, hung,
Like those thy lip hath kist, thy lyre hath sung.)
To that dim mansion of my breast they stole,
Where, wreath’d in blisses, lay my captive soul.
9 Eunapius, in his life of Jamblichus, tells us of two beautiful little spirits or
loves, which Jamblichus raised by enchantment from the warm springs at
Gadara; “ dicens astantibus (says the author of the Dii Fatidici, p. 160) illos
esse loci Genioswhich words however are not in Eunapius.
I find from Cellarius, that Amatha, in the neighbourhood of Gadara, was
also celebrated for its warm springs, and I have preferred it as a more poetical
name than Gadara. Cellarius quotes Hieronymus. “ Est et alia villa in
vicinia Gadarse nomine Amatha, ubi calidae aquae erumpunt.*’ Geograph.
Antiq. Lib. iii. cap. 13
Swift at their touch dissolv’d the ties, that cluog
So sweetly round her, and aloft she sprung!
Exulting guides, the little genii flew
Through paths of light, refresh’d with starry dew,
And fann’d by airs of that ambrosial breath,
On which the free soul banquets after death!
Thou know’st, my love, beyond our clouded skies,
As bards have dream’d, the spirits’ kingdom lies.
Through that fair clime a sea of ether rolls2
Gem’d with bright islands, where the hallow’d souls,
Whom life hath wearied in its race of hours,
Repose for ever in unfading bowers !
That very orb, whose solitary light
So often guides thee to my arms at night,
*	This belief of an ocean in the heavens, or iC waters above the firmament,”
was one of the many physical errors in which the early fathers bewildered
themselves. Le P. Baltus, in his “ Defense des saints Peres accuses de Pla-
tonisme,” taking it for granted that the antients were more correct in their
notions, (which by no means appears from what I have already quoted,) adduces
the obstinacy of the fathers in this whimsical opinion, as a proof of their re-
pugnance to even truth from the hands of the philosophers. This is a strange
way of defending the fathers,, and attributes much more than they deserve to
the philosophers. For an abstract of this work of Baltus, (the opposer of
Fontenelle, Van Dale, &c. in the famous oracle controversy) see ** Bibliotheque
des Auteurs £cclesiast. du 18 . siecle 1 Part. Tom 2.”
Is no chill planet, but an isle of love,
Floating, in splendour, through those seas above!
Thither, I thought, we wing’d our airy way,
Mild o’er its vallies stream’d a silvery day,
While, all around, on lily beds of rest,
Reclin’d the spirits of the immortal Blest3!
Oh! there I met those few congenial maids,
Whom love hath warm’d, in philosophic shades;
There still Leontium4, on her sage’s breast,
Found lore and love, was tutor’d and carest;
9 There were various opinions among the antients with respect to their lunar
establishment; some made it an elysium, and others a purgatory; while
some supposed it to be a kind of entre-ρόί between heaven and earth, where
souls which had left their bodies, and those that were on their way to join
them, were deposited in the vallies of Hecate, and remained till further orders.
Ύοις τΐίξΐ <τ£Κψψ octpt λεγαν αυτας κατοικειν9 neu «π* αυτής κάτω %ωξΐΐ» εις την
πεξίγειον γενεπψ. Stob. Lib. 1. Eclog. Physic.
4 The pupil and mistress of Epicurus, who called her his “ dear little Leon-
tium” (Αεονταξίον) as appears by a fragment of one of his letters in Laertius.
This Leontium was a woman of talent; “ she had the impudence (says Cicero)
to write against Theophrastus;” and, at the same time, Cicero gives her a name
which is neither polite nor translateable. “ Meretricula etiam Leontium contra
Theophrastum scribere ausa est.” De Natur. Deor. She left a daughter called
Danae, who was just as rigid an Epicurean as her mother; something like
Wieland’s Danae in Agathon.
It would sound much better, I think, if the name were Leontia, as it occurs
the first time in Laertius; but M. Menage will not hear of this reading.
And there the twine of PythiaV gentle arms
Repaid the zeal which deified her charms!
The Attic Master6, in Aspasia’s eyes
Forgot the toil of less endearing ties;
While fair Theano7, innocetitly fair,
Play’d with the ringlets of her Samian’s hair8,
*	Pythias was a woman whom Aristotle loved, and to whom after her death
he paid divine honours, solemnizing her memory by the same sacrifices which
the Athenians offered to the Goddess Ceres. For this impious gallantry the
philosopher was, of course, censured; it would be well however if some of our
modern Stagirites had a little of this superstition about the memory of their
mistresses.
*	Socrates; who used to console himself in the society of Aspasia for those
** less endearing ties” which he found at home with Xantippe. For an account
of this extraordinary creature, Aspasia, and her school of erudite luxury at
Athens, see L’Histoire de l’Academie, &c. Tom. xxxi. p. 69. Segur rather
fails on the subject of Aspasia. “ Les Femmes.” Tom. i. p. 122.
The Author of the w Voyage du Monde de Descartes” has also placed these
philosophers in the moon, and has allotted Seigneuries to them, as well as to
the astronomers; (2 Part. p. 143.) but he ought not to have forgotten their
wives and mistresses; ** curae non ipsa in morte relinquunt.”
7 There are some sensible letters extant under the name of this fair Pythago*
rean. They are addressed to her female friends upon the education of children,
the treatment of servants, &c. One, in particular, to Nicostrata, whose husband
had given her reasons for jealousy, contains such truly considerate and rational
advice, that it ought to be translated for the edification of all married ladies.
See Gale’s Opuscul. Myth. Phys. p. 741
*	Pythagoras was remarkable for fine hair, and Doctor Thiers (in his Histoire
Who, fix’d by love, at length was all her own,
And pass'd his spirit through her lips alone !
Oh Samian sage ! whate’er thy glowing thought
Of mystic Numbers hath divinely wrought;
The One that’s form’d of Two who dearly love,
Is the best number heaven can boast above !
But think, my Theon, how this soul was thrill’d,
When near a fount, which o’er the vale distill’d,
My fancy’s eye beheld a form recline,
Of lunar race, but so resembling thine,
That oh !—’twas but fidelity in me,
To fly, to clasp, and worship it for thee !
No aid of words the unbodied soul requires,
To waft a wish or embassy desires;
But, by a throb to spirits only given,
By a mute impulse, only felt in heaven,
Swifter than meteor shaft through summer skies,
From soul to soul the glanc’d idea flies!
des Perruques) seems to take for granted it was all his own; as he has not men-
tioned him among those antients who were obliged to have recourse to the
“ coma apposititia.” L’Hist. des Perruques, Chap. 1.
We met—like thee the youthful vision smil’d;
But not like thee, when passionately wild,
Thou wak’st the slumbering blushes of my cheek,
By looking things thyself would blush to speak!
No; ’twas the tender, intellectual smile,
Flush'd with the past and yet serene the while,
Of that delicious hour when, glowing yet,
Thou yield’st to nature with a fond regret,
And thy soul, waking from its wilder* d dream,
Lights in thine eye a mellower, chaster beam!
Oh my beloved ! how divinely sweet
Is the pure joy, when kindred spirits meet!
Th' Elean god9, whose faithful waters flow,
With love their only light, through caves below,
Wafting in triumph all the flowery braids,
And festal rings, with which Olympic maids
9	The river Alpheus; which flowed by Pisa or Olympia, and into which it was
customary to throw offerings of different kinds, during the celebration of the
Olympic games. In the pretty romance of Clitophon and Leucippe, the river
is supposed to carry these offerings as bridal gifts to the fountain Arethusa.
Kat eirt τψ Αξ&αταν «τω τον Αλφαον νυμφοτολει* όταν αν η των ολυμπίων Ιοςτη
χ. τ. λ. Lib. 1.
Have deck'd their billow, as an offering meet
To pour at Arethusa's crystal feet!
Think, when he mingles with his fountain-bride,
What perfect rapture thrills the blended tide!
Each melts in each, till one pervading kiss '
Confound their currents in a sea of bliss!
’Twas thus—
But, Theon, 'tis a weary theme,
And thou delight*st not in my lingering dream.
Oh ! that our lips were, at this moment, near
And I would kiss thee into patience, dear!
And make thee smile at all the magic tales
Of star-light bowers and planetary vales,
Which my fond soul, inspir’d by thee and love,
In slumber s loom hath exquisitely wove.
But no; no more—soon as to-morrow’s ray
O'er soft Ilissus shall dissolve away,
I'll fly, my Theon, to thy burning breast,
And there in murmurs tell thee all the rest:
Then if too weak, too cold the vision seems,
Thy lip shall teach me something more than dreams!
THE SENSES.
A DREAM.
Im bower’d in the vernal shades,
And circled all by rosy fences,
I saw the five luxurious maids,
Whom mortals love, and call The Senses.
Many and blissful were the ways,
In which they seem’d to pass their hours—
One wander’d through the garden’s maze,
Inhaling all the soul of flowers;
Like those, who live upon the smell
Of roses, by the Ganges’ stream1,
With perfume from the flowret’s bell,
She fed her life’s ambrosial dream!
1 Circa fontem Gangis Astomorum gentem..halitu tantum viventem et
odore quem naribus trahant. Plin. Lib. vii. cap. 2.
Another touch'd the silvery lute,
To chain a charmed sisters ear,
Who hung beside her, still and mute,
Gazing as if her eyes could hear!
The nymph, who thrill’d the warbling wire,
Would often raise her ruby lip,
As if it pouted with desire
Some cooling, nectar'd draught to sip.
Nor yet was she, who heard the lute,
Unmindful of the minstrel maid,
But prest the sweetest, richest fruit
To bathe her ripe lip as she play'd!
But oh ! the fairest of the group
Was one, who in the sunshine lay,
And op'd the cincture's golden loop
That hid her bosom's panting play!
And still her gentle hand she stole
Along the snows, so smoothly orb'd,
And look’d the while, as if her soul
Were in that heavenly touch absorb'd!
Another nymph, who linger’d nigh,
And held a prism of various light,
Now put the rainbow wonder by,
To look upon this lovelier sight.
And still as one’s enamour’d touch
Adown the lapsing ivory fell,
The other’s eye, entranc’d as much,
Hung giddy o’er its radiant swell!
Too wildly charm’d, I would have fled—
But she, who in the sunshine lay,
Replac’d her golden loop, and said,
“ We pray thee for a moment stay.
“ If true my counting pulses beat,
“ It must be now almost the hour,
“ When love, with visitation sweet,
“ Descends upon our bloomy bower.
“ And with him from the sky he brings
“ Our sister-nymph who dwells above—
“ Oh ! never may she haunt these springs,
“ With any other god but Love !
“ When he illumes her magic urn,
“ And sheds his own enchantments in it,
“ Though but a minute’s space it burn,
’Tis heaven to breathe it but a minute!
“ Not all the purest power we boast,
“ Nor silken touch, nor vernal dye,
“ Nor music, when it thrills the most,
“ Nor balmy cup, nor perfume’s sigh,
“ Such transport to the soul can give,
“ Though felt till time itself shall wither,
“ As in that one dear moment live,
“ When Love conducts our sister hither !’*
She ceas’d—the air respir’d of bliss—
A languor slept in every eye;
And now the scent of Cupid’s kiss
Declar’d the melting power was nigh !
I saw them come—the nymph and boy,
In twisted wreaths of rapture bound;
I saw her light the urn of joy,
While all her sisters languish’d round!
A sigh from every bosom broke—
I felt the flame’s infectious charms,
Till in a throb of bliss I woke,
And found myself in Fanny's arms !
THS
STEERSMAN’S SONG.
WRITTEN ABOARD THE BOSTON FRIGATE,
2SAPRIL *.
When freshly blows the northern gale,
And under courses snug we fly;
When lighter breezes swell the sail,
And royals proudly sweep the sky;
’Longside the wheel, unwearied still
I stand, and as my watchful eye
Doth mark the needle’s faithful thrill,
I think of her I love and cry,
Port, my boy ! port.
11 left Bermuda in the Boston about the middle of April, in company with
the Cambrian and Leander, aboard the latter of which was the Admiral, Sir
Andrew Mitchell, who divides his year between Halifax and Bermuda, and is
the very soul of society and good-fellowship to both. We separated in a few
days, and tlie Boston after a short cruise proceeded to New York.
When calms delay, or breezes blow
Right from the point we wish to steer;
When by the wind close-haul’d we go,
And strive in vain the port to near;
I think ’tis thus the fates defer
My bliss with one that’s far away,
And while remembrance springs to her,
I watch the sails and sighing say,
Thus, my boy ! thus.
But see the wind draws kindly aft,
All hands are up the yards to square,
And now the floating stu’n-sails waft
Our stately ship through waves and air.
Oh! then I think that yet for me
Some breeze of fortune thus may spring,
Some breeze to waft me, love, to thee!
And in that hope I smiling sing,
Steady, boy! so.
TO CLOE.
IMITATED FROM MARTIAL.
I could resign that eye of blue,
Howe'er it burn, howe'er it thrill me;
And though your lip be rich with dew,
To lose it, Cloe, scarce would kill me.
*	I
That snowy neck I ne'er should miss,
However warm I've twin'd about it;
And though your bosom beat with bliss,
I think my soul could live without it.
In short, I've learn'd so well to fast,
That, sooth my love, I know not whether
I might not bring myself at last,
To—do without you altogether!
FRAGMENTS OF A JOURNAL*.
To G. M. Esq.
FROM FREDERICKSBURGH, VIRGINIA*.
JUNE 2nd.
Dear George! though every bone is aching,
After the shaking
*	These fragments form but a small part of a ridiculous medley of prose
and doggerel, into which, for my amusement, I threw some of the incidents of
my journey. If it were even in a more rational form, there is yet much of it
too allusive and too personal for publication.
*	Having remained about a week at New York, where I saw Madam Jerome
Bonaparte, and felt a slight shock of an earthquake, (the only things that par-
ticularly awakened my attention,) I sailed again in the Boston for Norfolk, from
whence I proceeded on my tour to the northward, through Williamsburgh,
Richmond, &c. At Richmond there are a few men of considerable talents.
Mr. Wickham, one of their celebrated legal characters, is a gentleman, whose
manners and mode of life would do honour to the most cultivated societies.
I’ve had this week over ruts and ridges3,
And bridges,
Made of a few uneasy planks4,
In open ranks,
Like old women’s teeth, all loosely thrown
Over rivers of mud, whose names alone
Would make the knees of stoutest man knock,
Rappahannock,
Judge Marshall, the author of Washington's Life, is another very distinguished
ornament of Richmond. These gentlemen, I must observe, are of that respect-
able, but at present unpopular party, the Federalists.
*	What Mr. Weld says of the continual necessity of balancing or trimming
the stage, in passing over some of the wretched roads in America is by no means
exaggerated. “ The driver frequently had to call to the passengers in the stage,
to lean out of the carriage first at one side, then at the other, to prevent it
from oversetting in the deep ruts with which the road abounds. ( Now, gen-
tlemen, to the right;’ upon which the passengers all stretched their bodies
half way out of the carriage to balance it on that side: * Now, gentlemen, to
the left;* and so on.” Weld’s Travels, Letter 3.
4	Before the stage can pass one of these bridges, the driver is obliged to stop
and arrange the loose planks, of which it is composed, in the manner that best
suits his ideas of safety; and, as the planks are again disturbed by the passing of
the coach, the next travellers who arrive have of course a new arrangement to
make. Mahomet (as Sale tells us) was at some pains to imagine a precarious kind
of bridge for the entrance of Paradise, in order to enhance the pleasures of arrival;
a Virginian bridge, I think, would have answered his purpose completely.
Occoquan—the Heavens may harbour us!
Who ever heard of names so barbarous ?
Worse than M........’s Latin,
Or the.smooth codicil
To a witch’s will, where she brings her cat in!
I treat my goddess ill,
(My muse I mean) to make her speak ’em;
Like the verbum graecum,
Spermagoraiolekitholakanopolides5,
Words, that ought only be said upon holidays,
When one has nothing else to do.
But, dearest George, though every bone is aching
After this shaking,
And trying to regain the socket,
From which the stage thought fit to rock it—
I fancy I shall sleep the better,
For having scrawl’d a kind of letter
To you.
It seems to me like “ George, good night/*
Though far the spot I date it from;
5	'Σ.πίξμΜγοξοιιο'Κί,κι$&λα%ανοπω'Κι&ίς. From the Lysistrata of Aristophanes,
458.
To which I fancy while I write,
You answer back, “ Good night t’ye, Tom.”
But do not think that I shall turn all
Sorts of quiddities,
And insipidities
Into my journal;
That I shall tell you the different prices
Of eating, drinking and such other vices,
To “ contumace your appetites acidities.6”
No, no, the Muse too delicate bodied is
For such commodities!
Neither suppose, like fellow of college, she
Can talk of conchology
Or meteorology;
Or, that a nymph, who wild as comet errs,
Can discuss barometers,
Farming tools, statistic histories,
Geography, law or such like mysteries,
*	This phrase is taken verbatim from an Account of an expedition to Dram·
mond's Pond, by one of those many Americans, who profess to think that the
English language, as it has been hitherto written, is deficient in what they call
republican energy. One of the Savans of Washington is far advanced in the
construction of a new language for the United States, which is supposed to
be a mixture of Hebrew and Mikmak.
For which she doesn’t care three skips of
Prettiest flea, that e'er the lips of
Catherine Roache look’d smiling upon,
When bards of France all, one by one,
Declar’d that never did hand approach
Such a flea as was caught upon Catherine Roache7!
*	* *
Sentiment, George, I’ll talk, when I’ve got any,
And botany—
Oh! Linnaeus has made such a prig o’ me,
Cases I’ll find of such polygamy
Under every bush,
As would make the “ shy curcuma8” blush;
Vice under every name and shape,
From adulterous gardens to fields of rape!
I’ll send you some Dionaea Muscipula,
And, into Bartram’s book if you dip, you’ll a
7 Alluding to a collection of poems, called “ La puce des grands jours de
Poitiers.” They were all written upon a flea, which Stephen Pasquier found
on the bbsom of the famous Catherine des Roches one morning during the
grands-jours of Poitiers. I ask pardon of the learned Catherine's memory, for
my vulgar alteration of her most respectable name.
*	“ Curcuma, cold and shy.” Darwin.
Pretty and florid description find of
This “ ludicrous, lobed, carnivorous, kind of—
The Lord deliver us,
Think of a vegetable being “ carnivorous!”
And, George, be sure
I’ll treat you too, like Liancourt10,
(Nor thou be risible)
With all the views, so striking and romantic,
Which one might have of the Atlantic,
If it were visible.
*	* * *	* *
And now, to tell you the gay variety
Of my stage society.
There was a quaker, who room for twenty took,
Pious and big as a Polyglott Pentateuch!
There was his niece too, sitting so fair by,
Like a neat testament, kept to swear by.
9	« Observed likewise in these savannas abundance of the ludicrous Dionaea
Muscipula/' Bartram’s Travels in North America. For his description of this
“ carnivorous vegetable,” see Introduction, 13.
10	This philosophical Duke, describing the view from Mr. Jefferson's house,
says “ The Atlantic might be seen, were it not for the greatness of the distance,
which renders that prospect impossible.” See his Travels.
What pity, blooming girl!
That lips, so ready for a lover,
Should not beneath their ruby casket cover
One tooth of pearln;
But, like a rose beside the church-yard stone,
Be doom’d to blush o’er many a mouldering bone!
There was *	*	*	*
*	* *
There was a student of the college too,
Who said
Much more about the riches of his head,
Than, if there were an income-tax on brains,
His head could venture to acknowledge to.
I ask’d the Scholar,
If his—what d’ye call her ?
Alma Mater and her Bishop
Properly follow’d the Marquis’s wish up12,
11	Polygnotus was the first painter, says Pliny, who shewed the teeth in his
portraits. He would scarcely, I think, have been tempted to such an innovation,
in America.
M The Marquis de Chastellux, in his wise letter to Mr. Maddison, Professor
of Philosophy in the College of William and Mary at Williamsburgh, dwells
with much earnestness on the attention which should be paid to dancing. See
his Travels. This college, the only one in the state of Virginia, and the first
which I saw in America, gave me but a melancholy idea of republican seats of
And were much advancing
In dancing?
******
*	* *
The evening now grew dark and still;
The whip-poor-will
Sung pensively on every tree;
And strait I fell into a reverie
Upon that man of gallantry and pith,
Captain Smith13:
learning. That contempt for the elegancies of education, which the American
democrats affect, is no where more grossly conspicuous than in Virginia.
The young men, who look to advancement, study rather to be demagogues than
politicians; and as every thing that distinguishes from the multitude is supposed
to be invidious and unpopular, the levelling system is applied to education, and
has had all the effect which its partizans could desire, by producing a most ex·
tensive equality of ignorance. The Abbe Raynal, in his prophetic admonitions
to the Americans, directing their attention very strongly to learned establish·
ments, says “ When the youth of a country are seen depraved, the nation is
on the decline." I know not what the Abbe Raynal would pronounce of this
nation now, were he alive to know the morals of the young students at
Williamsburgh! But when he wrote, his countrymen had not yet introduced
the ** doctrinam deos spernentem” into America.
19 John Smith, a famous traveller, and by far the most enterprizing of the
first settlers in Virginia. How much he was indebted to the interesting young
Pocahuntas, daughter of King Powhatan, may be seen in all the histories of
this colony. In the dedication of his own work to the Dutchess of Richmond,
And very strange it seem’d to me,
That, after having kiss’d so grand a
Dame as Lady Trabigzanda,
By any chance he
Could take a fancy
To a nymph, with such a copper front as
Pocahuntas!
And now, as through the gloom so dark,
The fire-flies scatter’d many a fairy spark M,
To one, that glitter'd on the quaker s bonnet,
I wrote a sonnet.
he thus enumerates his bonnes fortunes. “ Yet my comfort is, that heretofore
honorable and vertuous Ladies, and comparable but among themselves, have
offered me rescue and protection in my greatest dangers. Even in forraine
parts I have felt reliefe from that sex. The beauteous Lady Trabigzanda, when
I was a slave to the Turks, did all she could to secure me. When I overcame
the Bashaw of Nalbrits in Tartaria, the charitable Lady Callamata supplyed
my necessities. In the utmost of my extremities, that blessed Pokahontas, the
great King's daughter of Virginia, oft saved my life."
Davis, in his whimsical travels through America, has manufactured into a
kind of romance the loves of Mr. Rolfe with this “ opaci maxima mundi”
Pocahuntas.
14	The lively and varying illumination, with which these fire-flies light
up the woods at night, gives quite an idea of enchantment. “ Puis ces mouches,
se developpant de 1’ oscurite de ces arbres et s’approchant de nous, nous les
voyions sur les orangers voisins, qu'ils mettoient tout en feu, nous rendant la
vue de leurs beaux fruits dores que la nuit avoit ravie, &c. &c.” See L’Histoire
des Antilles, Art. 2. Chap. iv. Liv. 1.
This morning, when the earth and sky
Were burning with the blush of spring,
1 saw thee not, thou humble fly,
Nor thought upon thy gleaming wing.
But now the skies have lost their hue,
And sunny lights no longer play,
I see thee, and I bless thee too
For sparkling o’er the dreary way.
Oh! let mfe hope, that thus for me,
When life and love shall lose their bloom,
Some milder joys may come, like thee,
To light, if not to warm, the gloom.
And---------
two lines more had just completed it;
But, at the moment I repeated it,
Our stage,
(Which good Brissot, with brains so critical
And sage,
Calleth the true “ machine political15”)
15	" The American stages are the true political carriages/' Brissot's Travels,
Letter 6th.—There is nothing more amusing than the philosophical singeries
of these French travellers. In one of the letters of Claviere, prefixed to those
With all its load of uncles, scholars, nieces,
Together jumbled,
Tumbled
Into a rut and fell to pieces !
*	* * * * *
Good night!—my bed must be,
By this time, warm enough for me,
Because I find old £phraim Steady,
And Miss his niece are there already!
Some cavillers
Object to sleep with fellow-travellers ;
But *	*	*	*
Saints protect the pretty quaker,
Heaven forbid that I should wake her!
of Brissot, upon their plan for establishing a republic of philosophers in some
part of the western world, he intreats Brissot to be particular in chusing a place
“ where there are no musquitoesforsooth, ne quid respublica detrimenti
caperet 1
THE YASE.
There was a vase of odour lay
For many an hour by Beauty’s bed,
So sweet, that Love went every day
To breathe the scented air it shed.
And not an eye had ever seen
The fragrant charm its lid conceal’d;
Oh Love! how happy ’twould have been,
If thou hadst ne’er that charm reveal’d !
But Love, like every other boy,
Must know the spell that lurks within;
He would have broke the crystal toy,
But Beauty murmur’d “ ’twas a sin!”
He swore, with many a tender plea,
That neither heaven or earth forbad it;
She told him, Virtue kept the key,
And look’d as if—she wish’d he had it!
He stole the key when Virtue slept,
(Ev’n she can sleep, if Love but ask it,)
And Beauty sigh’d, and Beauty wept,
While silly Love unlock’d the casket.
Oh dulcet air that vanish’d then!
Can Beauty’s sigh recall thee ever?
Can Love, himself, inhale again
A breath so precious ? never, never!
Go, maiden, weep—the tears of woe
By Beauty to repentance given,
Though bitterly on earth they flow,
Shall turn to fragrant balm in heaven!
THE
WREATH AND THE CHAIN.
I bring thee, love, a golden chain,
I bring thee too a flowery wreath;
The gold shall never wear a stain,
The flowrets long shall sweetly breathe!
Come, tell me which the tie shall be
To bind thy gentle heart to me.
The Chain is of a splendid thread,
Stol'n from Minerva's yellow hair,
Just when the setting sun had shed
The sober beam of evening there.
The Wreath's of brightest myrtle wove,
With brilliant tears of bliss among it,
And many a rose-leaf, cull'd by Love,
To heal his lip when bees have stung it!
Come, tell me which the tie shall be,
To bind thy gentle heart to me.
Yes, yes, I read that ready eye,
Which answers when the tongue is loath,
Thou lik'st the form of either tie,
And hold’st thy playful hands for both.
Ah !—if there were not something wrong,
The world would see them blended oft;
The Chain would make the Wreath so strong!
The Wreath would make the Chain so soft!
Then might the gold, the flow’rets be
Sweet fetters for my love and me!
But, Fanny, so unblest they twine,
That (heaven alone can tell the reason)
When mingled thus they cease to shine,
Or shine but for a transient season \
Whether the Chain may press too much,
Or that the Wreath is slightly braided,
Let but the gold the flow’rets touch,
And all their glow, their tints are faded!
Sweet Fanny, what would Rapture do,
When all her blooms had lost their grace ?
Might she not steal a rose or two,
From other Wreaths to fill their place ?—
Oh! better to be always free,
Than thus to bind my love to me.
The timid girl now hung her head,
And, as she turn'd an upward glance,
I saw a doubt its twilight spread
Along her brow’s divine expanse.
Just then, the garland’s dearest rose
Gave one of its seducing sighs—
Oh! who can ask how Fanny chose,
That ever look’d in Fanny's eyes!
“ The Wreath, my life, the Wreath shall be
“ The tie to bind my soul to thee!”
SONG.
I ne'er on that lip for a minute have gaz'd,
But a thousand temptations beset me,
And I've thought, as the dear little rubies you rais’d,
How delicious ’twould be—if you’d let me!
Then be not so angry for what I have done,
Nor say that you've sworn to forget me;
They were buds of temptation too pouting to shun,
And I thought that—you could not but let me !
When your lip with a whisper came close to my cheek,
Oh think how bewitching it met me !
And, plain as the eye of a Venus could speak,
Your eye seem’d to say—you would let me!
Then forgive the transgression, and hid me remain,
For, in truth, if I go, you’ll regret me;
Or oh !—let me try the transgression again,
And I’ll do all you wish—will you let me ?
TO
And hast thou mark’d the pensive shade,
That many a time obscures my brow,
’Mid all the blisses, darling maid,
Which thou can’st give, and only thou?
Oh ! ’tis not that I then forget
The endearing charms, that round me twine—
There never throb’d a bosom yet
Could feel their witchery, like mine !
When bashful on my bosom hid,
And blushing to have felt so blest,
Thou dost but lift thy languid lid,
Again to close it on my breast!
Oh! these are minutes all thine own,
Thine own to give, and mine to feel,
Yet ev’n in them, my heart has known
The sigh to rise, the tear to steal.
For I have thought of former hours,
When he who first thy soul possess’d,
Like me awak'd its witching powers,
Like me was lov'd, like me was blest!
Upon Ms name thy murmuring tongue
Perhaps hath all as sweetly dwelt;
For him that snowy lid hath hung
In ecstasy, as purely felt!
For him—yet why the past recall
To wither blooms of present bliss?
Thou'rt now my own, I clasp thee all,
And heaven can grant no more than this !
Forgive me, dearest, oh ! forgive;
I would be first, be sole to thee,
Thou should'st have but begun to live,
The hour that gave thy heart to me.
Thy book of life till then effac’d,
Love should have kept that leaf alone,
On which he first so dearly trac'd
That thou wert, soul and all, my own !
EPISTLE VI.
TO
LORD VISCOUNT FORBES,
FROM WASHINGTON.
Keu fwj SaMjiAmji μ,ψ «(ΐαχςοηξχν γιγξαφα ιψ trirroKifv, μαγι' « η wtftsfyortfw
η *ξΐϊ βντιχωηζον ιιρμβψΛ* $ν αυτή.	Isocbat.	Epitt. iv.
If former times had never left a trace
Of human frailty in their shadowy race,
Nor o’er their pathway written, as they ran,
One dark memorial of the crimes of man;
If every age, in new unconscious prime,
Rose, like a phoenix, from the fires of time,
To wing its way unguided and alone,
The future smiling and the past unknown;
Then ardent man would to himeelf be new,
Earth at his foot and heaven within his view,
Well might the novice hope, the sanguine scheme
Of full perfection prompt his daring dream,
Ere cold experience, with her veteran lore,
Could tell him, fools had dream'd as much before!
But, tracing as we do, through age and clime
The plans of virtue midst the deeds of crime,
The thinking follies and the reasoning rage
Of man, at once the ideot and the sage;
When still we see, through every varying frame
Of arts and polity, his course the same,
And know that antient fools but died, to make
A space on earth for modern fools to take;
'Tie strange, how quickly we the past forget;
That wisdom's self should not be tutor'd yet,
Nor tire of watching for the monstrous birth
Of pure perfection midst the sons of earth !
Oh! nothing but that soul which God has given,
Could lead us thus to look on earth for heaven;
O’er dross without to shed the flame within,
And dream of virtue while we gaze on sin!
Even here, beside the proud Potowmac’s stream,
Might sages still pursue the flattering theme
Of days to come, when man shall conquer fate,
Rise o’er the level of his mortal state,
Belie the monuments of frailty past,
And stamp perfection on this world at last!
“ Here,” might they say, “ shall powers divided reign
“ Evince that patriots have not bled in vain.
“ Here godlike liberty’s herculean youth,
“ Cradled in peace, and nurtur’d up by truth
“To full maturity of nerve and mind,
“ Shall crush the giants that bestride mankind1!
“ Here shall religion’s pure and balmy draught,
“ In form no more from cups of state be quafTd,
“ But flow for all, through nation, rank, and sect,
“ Free as that heaven its tranquil waves reflect.
“ Around the columns of the public shrine
“ Shall growing arts their gradual wreath entwine,
1 Thus Morse. ** Here the sciences and the arts of civilized life are to
receive their highest improvements: here civil and religious liberty are to
flourish, unchecked by the cruel hand of civil or ecclesiastical tyranny: here
genius, aided by all the improvements of former ages, is to be exerted in human·
izing mankind, in expanding and enriching their minds with religious and
philosophical knowledge,” &c. &c. P. 569.
<c Nor. breathe corruption from their flowering braid,
“ Nor mine that fabric which they bloom to shade.
“ No longer here shall Justice bound her view,
“ Or wrong the many, while she rights the few ;
“ But take her range through all the social frame,
“ Pure, and pervading as that vital flame,
“ Which warms at once our best and meanest part,
“ And thrills a hair while it expands a heart!”
Oh golden dream! what soul that loves to scan
The brightness rather than the shades of man,
That owns the good, while smarting with the ill,
And loves the world with all its frailty still—
What ardent bosom does not spring to meet
The generous hope with all that heavenly heat,
Which makes the soul unwilling to resign
The thoughts of growing, even on earth, divine!
Yes, dearest Forbes, I see thee glow to think
The chain of ages yet may boast a link
Of purer texture than the world has known,
And fit to bind us to a Godhead's throne!
But, is it thus 1 doth even the glorious dream
Borrow from truth that faint, penumbral gleam,
Which bids us give such dear delusion scope,
As kills not reason, while it nurses hope ?
No, no, believe me, 'tis not so—ev'n now,
While yet upon Columbia’s rising brow
The showy smile of young presumption plays,
Her bloom is poison’d and her heart decays!
Even now, in dawn of life, her sickly breath
Burns with the taint of empires near their death,
And, like the nymphs of her own withering clime,
She’s old in youth, she's blasted in her prime5!
Already has the child of Gallia's school,
The foul Philosophy that sins by rule,
With all her train of reasoning, damning arts,
Begot by brilliant heads on worthless hearts,
Like things, that quicken after Nilus’ flood,
The venom'd birth of sunshine and of mud !
*	** What will be the old age of this government, if it is thus early
decrepit!” Such was the remark of Fauchet, the French minister at Philadel-
phia, in that famous dispatch to his government which was intercepted by one
of our cruisers in the year 1794. This curious memorial may be found in
Porcupine’s Works, Vol. i. P. 279. It remains a striking monument of repub-
lican intrigue on one side and republican profligacy on the other; and I would
recommend the perusal of it to every honest politician, who may labour under
a moment’s delusion with respect to the purity of American patriotism.
Already has she pour’d her poison here
O'er every charm that makes existence dear,
Already blighted, with her blackening trace,
The opening bloom of every social grace,
And all those courtesies, that love to shoot
Round virtue's stem, the flowrets of her fruit!
Oh! were these errors but the wanton tide
Of young luxuriance, of unchasten’d pride;
The fervid follies and the faults of such
As wrongly feel, because they feel too much;
Then might experience make the fever less,
Nay, graft a virtue on each warm excess:
But no; ’tis heartless, speculative ill,
All youth’s transgression with all age’s chill,
The apathy of wrong, the bosom’s ice,
A slow and cold stagnation into vice!
Long has the love of gold, that meanest rage,
And latest folly of man’s sinking age,
Which, rarely venturing in the van of life,
While nobler passions wage their heated strife,
Comes skulking last, with selfishness and fear,
And dies, collecting lumber in the rear!
Long has it palsied every grasping hand
And greedy spirit through this bartering land;
Turn’d life to traffic, set the demon gold
So loose abroad, that virtue’s self is sold,
And conscience, truth and honesty are made
To rise and fall, like other wares of trade!
Already in this free, this virtuous state,
Which, Frenchmen tell us, was ordain’d by fate,
To shew the world, what high perfection springs
From rabble senators, and merchant kings—
Even here already patriots learn to steal
Their private perquisites from public weal3,
3	“ I must decline/' (says Washington, in his inaugural address to Con-
gress,) “ I must decline» as inapplicable to myself, any share in the personal
emoluments which may be indispensably included in a permanent provision
for the executive department.”---After such a declaration, it is by no
means pleasant to know, that Washington not only received his salary, but
was in the habit of anticipating the regular periods of payment, and had
constantly, during a space of five years, several thousand dollars of the public
money in his hands. He was accused of letting out those sums at interest,
but this we may consider as a calumny of the party opposed to him. The
fact however of his overdrawing the salary appears by an extract from the
Books of the Treasury, subjoined to a justification which the Secretary found
it necessary to publish at the time; and this exposure was one of the many
humiliations which preceded the retirement of Washington from the Presi-
dency.
And, guardians of the country’s sacred fire,
Like Afiric’s priests, they let the flame for hire !
Those vaunted demagogues, who nobly rose
From England’s debtors to be England’s foes,
Who could their monarch in their purse forget,
And break allegiance, but to cancel debt4,
Have prov’d at length the mineral’s tempting hue,.
Which makes a patriot, can unmake him too5.
Oh! freedom, freedom, how I hate thy cant!
Not Eastern bombast, not the savage rant
Of purpled madmen, were they number'd all
From Roman Nero down to Russian Paul,
Could grate upon my ear so mean, so base,
As the rank jargon of that factious race,
4	The most persevering enemy to the interests of this country, amongst the
politicians of the western world, has been a Virginian merchant, who, finding
it easier to settle his conscience than his debts, was one of the first to raise
the standard against Great Britain, and has ever since endeavoured to revenge
upon the whole country the obligations which he lies under to a few of its
merchants.
5	See Porcupine's account of the Pennsylvania Insurrection in 1794. In short,
see Porcupine’s Works throughout, for ample corroboration of every sentiment
which I have ventured to express. In saying this, I refer less to the comments
of that writer, than to the occurrences which he has related and the documents
which he has preserved. Opinion may be suspected of bias, but facts speak
for themselves.
Who poor of heart and prodigal of words,
Born to he slaves and struggling to he lords,
But pant for licence, while they spurn controul,
And shout for rights, with rapine in their soul!
Who can, with patience, for a moment see
The medley mass of pride and misery,
Of whips and charters, manacles and rights,
Of slaving blacks and democratic whites6,
And all the pye-bald polity that reigns
In free confusion o’er Columbia’s plains?
To think that man, thou just and gentle God!
Should stand before thee, with a tyrant’s rod
O’er creatures like himself, with souls from thee,
Yet dare to boast of perfect liberty!
Away, away—Pd rather hold my neck
By doubtful tenure from a sultan’s beck,
*	In Virginia the effects of this system begin to be felt rather seriously.
While the master raves of liberty, the slave cannot but catch the contagion,
and accordingly there seldom elapses a month without some alarm of insur-
rection amongst the negroes. The accession of Louisiania, it is feared, will
increase this embarrassment j as the numerous emigrations, which are expected
to take place, from the southern states to this newly acquired territory, will
considerably dkninish the white population, and thus strengthen the proportion
of negroes, to a degree which must ultimately be ruinous.
In climes, where liberty has scarce been nam’d,
Nor any right but that of ruling claim’d,
Than thus to live, where bastard freedom waves
Her fustian flag in mockery over slaves;
Where (motley laws admitting no degree
Betwixt the vilely slav’d and madly free)
Alike the bondage and the licence suit
The brute made ruler and the man made brute!
But, oh my Forbes ! while thus, in flowerless song,
I feebly paint, what yet I feel so strong,
The ills, the vices of the land, where first
Those rebel fiends, that rack the world, were nurst;
Where treason’s arm by royalty was nerv’d,
And Frenchmen learn’d to crush the throne they serv’d—
Thou, gently lull’d in dreams of classic thought,
By bards illumin’d and by sages taught,
Pant’st to be all, upon this mortal scene,
That bard hath fancied or that sage hath been I
Why should I wake thee Ί why severely chase
The lovely forms of virtue and of grace,
That dwell before thee, like the pictures spread
By Spartan matrons round the genial bed,
Moulding thy fancy, and with gradual art
Brightening the young conceptions of thy heart!
Forgive me, Forbes—and should the song destroy
One generous hope, one throb of social joy,
One high pulsation of the zeal for man,
Which few can feel, and bless that few who can!
Oh! turn to him, beneath whose kindred eyes
Thy talents open and thy virtues rise,
Forget where nature has been dark or dim,
And proudly study all her lights in him!
Yes, yes, in him the erring world forget,
And feel that man may reach perfection yet!
SONG.
The wreath you wove, the wreath you wove
Is fair—but oh ! how fair,
If pity’s hand had stol’n from love
One leaf to mingle there !
If every rose with gold were tied,
Did gems for dew-drops fall,
One faded leaf, where love had sigh d,
Were sweetly worth them all!
The wreath you wove, the wreath you wove
Our emblem well may be;
Its bloom is yours, but hopeless love
Must keep its tears for me !
AT NIGHT1.
At night, when all is still around,
How sweet to hear the distant sound
Of footstep, coming soft and light!
What pleasure in the anxious beat,
With which the bosom flies to meet
That foot, that comes so soft at night!
And then, at night, how sweet to say
“ 'Tie late, my love!” and chide delay,
Though still the western clouds are bright;
Oh ! happy too the silent press,
The eloquence of mute caress,
With those .we love exchang'd at night!
1 These lines allude to a carious lamp, which has for its device a Cupid, with
the words ** At Night” written over him.
At night, what dear employ to trace,
In fancy, every glowing grace
That’s hid by darkness from the si git;
And guess by every broken sigh,
What tales of bliss the shrouded eye
Is telling from the soul at night!
A A
ANACREONTIC.
I fill’d to thee, to thee I drank,
I nothing did but drink and fill;
The bowl by turns was bright and blank,
’Twas drinking, filling, drinking still!
At length I bid an artist paint
Thy image in this ample cup,
That I might see the dimpled saint,
To whom I quaff’d my nectar up.
Behold, how bright that purple lip
Is blushing through the wave at me !
Every roseate drop I sip
Is just like kissing wine from thee !
But oh! T drink the more for this;
For, ever when the draught I drain,
Thy lip invites another kiss,
And in the nectar flows again!
So, here's to thee, my gentle dear!
And may that eye for ever shine
Beneath as soft and sweet a tear
As bathes it in this bowl of mine !
TO
S PICTURE.
1803.
Go then, if she whose shade thou art
No more will let thee soothe my pain—
Yet tell her, it has cost this heart
Some pangs, to give thee back again !
Tell her, the smile was not so dear,
With which she made thy semblance mine,
As bitter is the burning tear,
With which I now the gift resign!
Oh! many an hour of lonely night,
While -------- thought her love betray’d,
These eyes have known no dear delight
But gazing upon-------------*s shade !
Yes, though my heart was sad the while,
(As sad, alas! this heart can be,)
I’ve kist thee, till thou’st seem’d to smile,
And in that smile was peace for me !
Yet go—and could she still restore,
As some exchange for taking thee,
The tranquil look which first I wore,
When her eyes found me wild and free;
Could she give back the careless flow,
The spirit which my fancy knew—
Yet, ah! 'tis vain—go, picture, go—
Smile at me once, and then—adieu!
FROM THE GREEK1.
I’ve prest her bosom oft and oft;
In spite of many a pouting cheek,
Have touch'd her lip in dalliance soft,
And play'd around her silvery neck.
But, as for more—the maid’s so coy,
That saints or angels might have seen us;
She’s now for prudence, now for joy,
Minerva half, and half a Venue.
When Venus makes her bless me near,
Why then, Minerva makes her loth ;
And—oh the sweet, tormenting dear!
She makes me mad between them both !
1 Μαζβ;	*χω, orojttari arofia, St *tpt 9ηρψ
kvyrta. \wruium /SooTiopu αργυρήν
Ουτω ? afpvytvtiav όλην |λor* αλλ* m κβψ,ναιψ
Ώα.ρ$ίνον afjLfintov λ&ρορ arcuropurQf.
'Hfun γαρ Uafty, ro αρ ijfMev Sunuv Α&ηνγ
Avrctp rjfta furns njito/imu afifortpwr.
Paulus Silentiarium
FRAGMENT
OP
A MYTHOLOGICAL HYMN TO LOVE1.
Blest infant of eternity!
Before the day-star learn d to move,
In pomp of fire, along his grand career,
Glancing the beamy shafts of light
From his rich quiver to the farthest sphere,
Thou wert alone, oh Love!
Nestling beneath the wings of ancient night
Whose horrors seem’d to smile in shadowing thee!
1 Love and Psyche are here considered as the active and passive principles
of creation, and the universe is supposed to have received its first harmonizing
impulse from the nuptial sympathy between these two powers. A marriage is
generally the first step in cosmogony. Timaeus held Form to be the father and
Matter the mother of the World; Elion and Berouth, I think, are Sancho-
niatho’s first spiritual lovers, and Manco-capac and his wife introduced creation
amongst the Peruvians. In short, Harlequin seems to have studied cosmogonies,
when he said “ tutto il mondo έ fatto come la nostra fafliiglia.”
No form of beauty sooth’d thine eye,
As through the dim expanse it wander'd wide
No kindred spirit caught thy sigh,
As o’er the watery waste it lingering died!
Unfelt the pulse, unknown the power,
That latent in his heart was sleeping;
Oh Sympathy! that lonely hour
Saw Love himself thy absence weeping!
But look what glory through the darkness beams!
Celestial airs along the water glide:
What spirit art thou, moving o’er the tide
So lovely? art thou but the child
Of the young godhead’s dreams,
That mock his hope with fancies strange and wild ?
Or were his tears, as quick they fell,
Collected in so bright a form,
Till, kindled by the ardent spell
Of his desiring eyes,
And all impregnate with his sighs,
They spring to life in shape so fair and warm !
*Tis she!
Psyche, the first-born spirit of the air
To thee, oh Love ! she turns,
On thee her eye-beam burns :
Blest hour of nuptial ecstasy!
They meet—
The blooming god—the spirit fair—
Oh ! sweet, oh heavenly sweet \
Now, Sympathy, the hour is thine;
All nature feels the thrill divine,
The veil of Chaos is withdrawn,
And their first kiss is great Creation s dawn!
* * * * *
* * * *
TO
HIS SERENE HIGHNESS
THE DUKE OF MONTPENSIER,
ON HIS
PORTRAIT OF THE LADY ADELAIDE F—RB—S.
Donington Park, 1802.
To catch the thought, by painting's spell,
Howe’er remote, howe’er refin’d,
And o’er the magic tablet tell
The silent story of the mind;
O’er nature’s form to glance the eye,
And fix, by mimic light and shade,
Her morning tinges, ere they fly,
Her evening blushes, ere they fade !
These are the pencil’s grandest theme,
Divinest of the powers divine
That light the Muse’s flowery dream,
And these, oh Prince! are richly thine !
Yet, yet, when Friendship sees thee trace,
In emanating soul exprest,
The sweet memorial of a face
On which her eye delights to rest;
While o’er the lovely look serene,
The smile of peace, the bloom of youth,
The cheek, that blushes to be seen,
The eye, that tells the bosom’s truth;
While o’er each line, so brightly true,
Her soul with fond attention roves,
Blessing the hand, whose various hue
Could imitate the form it loves;
She feels the value of thy art,
And owns it with a purer zeal,
A rapture, nearer to her heart,
Than critic taste can ever feel!
THE
PHILOSOPHER1 ARISTIPPUS
TO
A LAMP WHICH WAS GIVEN HIM BY LAIS.
PVLCIS CONSCIA LECTULI LUCERNA.
Martial, Lib. xiv. Epig. 39.
“ Oh! love the Lamp” (my Mistress said)
“ The faithful Lamp that, many a night,
“ Beside thy Lais' lonely bed
“ Has kept its little watch of light!
»
1 It was not very difficult to become a philosopher amongst the antients.
A moderate store of learning, with a considerable portion of confidence, and
wit enough to produce an occasional apophthegm, were all the necessary qua-
lifications for the purpose. The principles of moral science were so very
“ Full often has it seen her weep,
“ And fix her eye upon its flame,
“ Till, weary, she has sunk to sleep,
“ Repeating her beloved’s name!
“ Oft has it known her cheek to burn
“ With recollections, fondly free,
" And seen her turn, impassion’d turn
“To kiss the pillow, love ! for thee,
“ And, in a murmur, wish thee there,
“ That kiss to feel, that thought to share !
imperfectly understood, that the founder of a new sect, in forming his ethical
code, might consult either fancy or temperament, and adapt it to his own
passions and propensities; so that Mahomet, with a little qoore learning,
might have flourished as a philosopher in those days, and would have required
but the polish of the schools to become the rival of Aristippus in morality. In
the science of nature too, though they discovered some valuable truths, yet
they seemed not to know they were truths, or at least were as well satisfied
with errors; and Xenophanes, who asserted that the stars were igneous clouds,
lighted up every night and extinguished again in the morning, was thought
and styled a philosopher, as generally as he who anticipated Newton in de-
veloping the arrangement of the universe.
For this opinion of Xenophanes, see Plutarch de Placit. Philosoph. Lib. ii.
Cap. 13. It is impossible to read this treatise of Plutarch, without alternately
admiring and smiling at the genius, the absurdities of the philosophers.
“ Then love the Lamp—'twill often lead
“ Thy step through learning's sacred way;
“ And, lighted by its happy ray,
“ Whene’er those darling eyes shall read
“ Of things sublime, of nature’s birth
“ Of all that’s bright in heaven or earth
“ Oh! think that she, by whom 'twas given,
“ Adores thee more than earth or heaven!”
Yes—dearest Lamp ! by every charm
On which thy midnight beam has hung2;
The neck reclin’d, the graceful arm
Across the brow of ivory flung;
The heaving bosom, partly hid,
The sever d lip' s delicious sighs,
The fringe, that from the snowy lid
Along the cheek of roses lies:
8	The antients had their lucernae cubiculariae or bed-chamber lamps, which
as the Emperor Galienus said “ nil cras meminere;” and with the same com-
mendation of secresy, Praxagora addresses her lamp in Aristophanes, Εχχλκ.
We may judge how fanciful they were, in the use and embellishment of
their lamps, from the famous symbolic Lucerna which we find in the Romanum
Museum Mich. Ang. Causei, p. 127.
By these, by all that bloom untold,
And long as all shall charm my heart,
I'll love my little Lamp of gold,
My Lamp and I shall never part!
And often, as she smiling said,
In fancy’s hour, thy gentle rays
Shall guide my visionary tread
Through poesy's enchanting maze !
Thy flame shall light the page refin’d,
Where still we catch the Chian’s breath,
Where still the bard, though cold in death,
Has left his burning soul behind !
Or, o’er thy humbler legend shine,
Oh man of Ascra’s dreary glades3!
To whom the nightly-warbling Nine4
A wand of inspiration gave5,
Pluck’d from the greenest tree, that shades
The crystal of Castalia’s wave.
9	Hesiod, who tells us in melancholy terms of his father’s flight to the
wretched village of Ascra. Εςγ. χαι Ήpp. v. 251.
4 Ενη/χιαι Γί/χον, πίξίχαλλία txrcav uurat. Theog. v. 10.
s Kat pot (τκφττξον εδο?, δάφνης ίξί$ηλία οζον. Id. v. 30.
Then, turning to a purer lore,
We’ll cull the sages heavenly store,
From Science steal her golden clue,,
And every mystic path pursue,
Where Nature, far from vulgar eye»
Through labyrinths of wonder flies!
’Tis thus my heart shall learn to know
The passing world’s precarious flight,
Where all, that meets the morning glow,
Is chang’d before the fall of night5!
I’ll tell thee, as I trim thy fire,
“ Swift, swift the tide of being runs,
,e And Time, who bids thy flame expire
“ Will also quench yon heaven of suns!”
Oh ! then if earth’s united power
Can never chain one feathery hour;
*	Pav tu όλα ποταμν hnqv, as, expressed among the dogmas of Heraclitus
the Ephesian, and with the same image by Seneca, in whom we find a beautiful
diffusion of the thought. “ Nemo est mane, qui fuit pridie. Corpora nostra
rapiuntur fluminum more; quidquid vides currit cum tempore. Nihil ex his quas
videmus manet. Ego ipse, dum loquor mutari ipsa, mutatus sum,” &c.
If every print we leave to-day
To-morrow’s wave shall steal away;
Who pauses, to enquire of heaven
Why were the fleeting treasures given,
The sunny days, the shady nights,
And all their brief but dear delights,
Which heaven has made for man to use,
And man should think it guilt to lose ?
Who, that has cull’d a weeping rose,
Will ask it why it breathes and glows.
Unmindful of the blushing ray,
In which it shines its soul away;
Unmindful of the scented si gh>
On which it dies and loves to die!
Pleasure ! thou only good on earth7!
One little hour resign’d to thee—
Oh ! by my Lais’ lip, ’tis worth,
The sage’s immortality!
7	Aristippus considered motion as the principle of happiness, in which idea
he differed from the Epicureans, who looked to a state of repose as the only true
voluptuousness, and avoided even the too lively agitations of pleasure, as a
violent and ungraceful derangement of the senses.
Then far be all the wisdom hence,
And all the lore, whose tame controul
Would wither joy with chill delays!
Alas! the fertile fount of sense,
At which the young, the panting soul
Drinks life and love, too soon decays I
Sweet Lamp ! thou wert not form'd to shed
Thy splendour on a lifeless page—
Whate'er my blushing Lais said
Of thoughtful lore and studies sage
'Twas mockery all—her glance of joy
Told me thy dearest, best employ8!
8	Maupertuis has been still more explicit than this philosopher, in ranking
the pleasures of sense above the sublimest pursuits of wisdom. Speaking of
the infant man, in his production, he calls him, “ une nouvelle creature, qui
pourra comprendre les choses les plus sublimes, et ce qui est bien au-dessus,
qui pourra gouter les m&mes plaisirs.” See his nus Physique. This appears
to be one of the efforts at Fontenelle’s gallantry of manner, for which the
learned President is so well ridiculed in the Akakia of Voltaire.
Maupertuis may be thought to have borrowed from the antient Aristippus
that indiscriminate theory of pleasures which he has set forth in his Essai de
Philosophe Morale, and for which he was so very justly condemned. Aristippus,
according to Laertius, held μη tudptpiy re jjJowjf, which irrational senti-
ment has been adopted by Maupertuis: “ Tant qu’on ne considere que Γ etat
present, tous les plaisirs sont du m&ne genre,” &c. &c.
And, soon as night shall close the eye
Of heaven’s young wanderer in the west;
When seers are gazing on the sky,
To find their future orbs of rest;
Then shall I take my trembling way,
Unseen but to those worlds above,
And, led by thy mysterious ray,
Glide to the pillow of my love.
Calm be her sleep, the gentle dear!
Nor let her dream of bliss so near;
Till o’er her cheek she thrilling feel
My sighs of fire in murmurs steal,
And I shall lift the locks, that flow
Unbraided o’er her lids of snow,
And softly kiss those sealed eyes,
And wake her into sweet surprise !
Or if she dream, oh ! let her dream
Of those delights we both have known
And felt so truly, that they seem
Form’d to be felt by us alone !
And I shall mark her kindling cheek,
Shall see her bosom warmly move,
And hear her faintly, lowly speak
The murmur’d sounds so dear to love!
Oh! I shall gaze, till even the sigh,
That wafts her very soul, be nigh,
And when the nymph is all but blest,
Sink in her arms and share the rest!
Sweet Lais ! what an age of bliss
In that one moment waits for me!
Oh sages !—think on joy like this,
And where’s your boast of apathy!
TO
MRS. BL—H—D.
WRITTEN IN HER ALBUM.
Two St n ivri to xorov; νλατη, ιφη.
Cebetit Tabula.
They say that Love had once a book,
(The urchin likes to copy you,)
Where, all who came the pencil took,
And wrote, like us, a line or two.
'Twas Innocence, the maid divine,
Who kept this volume bright and fair,
And saw that no unhallow’d line,
Or thought profane should enter there.
And sweetly did the pages fill
With fond device and loving lore,
And every leaf she turn’d was still
More bright than that she turn’d before !
Beneath the touch of Hope, how soft,
How light the magic pencil ran!
Till Fear would come, alas! as oft,
And trembling close what Hope began.
A tear or two had dropp’d from Grief,
And Jealousy would, now and then,
Ruffle in haste some snowy leaf,
Which Love had still to smooth again!
But, oh! there was a blooming boy,
Who often turn’d the pages o’er,
And wrote therein such words of joy,
As all who read still sigh’d for more!
And Pleasure was this spirit’s name,
And though so soft his voice and look,
Yet Innocence, whene’er he came,
Would tremble for her spotless book!
For still she saw his playful fingers
Fill'd with sweets and wanton toys;
And well she knew the stain, that lingers
After sweets from wanton boys!
And so it chanc’d, one luckless night
He let his honey-goblet fall
O’er the dear book, so pure, so white,
And sullied lines and marge and all!
In vain he sought, with eager lip
The honey from the leaf to drink,
For still the more the boy would sip,
The deeper still the blot would sink!
Oh ! it would make you weep to see
The traces of this honey flood
Steal o’er a page where Modesty
Had freshly drawn a rose’s bud !
And Fancy’s emblems lost their glow,
And Hope’s sweet lines were all defac’d,
And Love himself could scarcely know
What Love himself had lately trac’d !
At length the urchin Pleasure fled,
(For how, alas ! could Pleasure stay ?)
And Love, while many a tear he shed,
In blushes flung the book away !
The index now alone remains,
Of all the pages spoil'd by Pleasure,
And though it bears some honey stains,
Yet Memory counts the leaf a treasure !
And oft, they say, she scans it o'er,
And oft, by this memorial aided,
Brings back the pages now no more,
And thinks of lines, that Jong are faded !
I know not if this tale be true,
But thus the simple facts are stated;
And I refer their truth to you,
Since Love and you are near related!
EPISTLE VII.
TO
THOMAS HUME, ESQ. M.D.
FROM THE CITY OF WASHINGTON.
AnjyV?ojiMW ίιηγημΜΊ’α if ως awτα. χοινωνα wv «'«τονθα ex «χωκ.
Xenopbont. Ephes. Ephesiae. Lib. τ.
Tis evening now; the heats and cares of day
In twilight dews are calmly wept away.
The lover now, beneath the western star,
Sighs through the medium of his sweet segar,
And fills the ears of some consenting she
With puffs and vows, with smoke and constancy!
The weary statesman for repose hath fled
From halls of council to his negro’s shed,
Where blest he woos some black Aspasia’s grace,
And dreams of freedom in his slave's embrace1!
In fancy now, beneath the twilight gloom,
Come, let me lead thee o’er this modern Rome2,
Where tribunes rule, where dusky Davi bow,
And what was Goose-Creek once is Tiber now3!—
This fam'd metropolis, where Fancy sees
Squares in morasses, obelisks in trees;
Which travelling fools and gazetteers adorn
With shrines unbuilt and heroes yet unborn,
Though nought but wood4 arid ********* they see,
Where streets should run and sages ought to be!
1 The ** black Aspasia” of the present ********* of the United States, “ inter
Avernales haud ignotissima nymphas” has given rise to much pleasantry among
the anti-democrat wits in America.
*	“ On the original location of the ground now allotted for the seat of the
Federal City (says Mr. Weld) the identical spot on which the capitol now
stands was called Rome. This anecdote is related by many as a certain prog-
nostic of the future magnificence of this city, which is to be, as it were, a
second Rome.” Weld’s Travels, Letter iv.
3	A little stream runs through the city, which, with intolerable affectation,
they have styled the Tiber. It was originally called Goose-Creek.
4	“ To be under the necessity of going through a deep wood for one or two
And look, how soft in yonder radiant wave,
The dying sun prepares his golden grave!—
Oh great Potowmac ! oh yon banks of shade !
Yon mighty scenes, in nature's morning made,
While still, in rich magnificence of prime,
She pour'd her wonders, lavishly sublime,
Nor yet had leara'd to stoop, with humbler care,
From grand to soft, from wonderful to fair!
miles, perhaps, in order to see a next-door neighbour, and in the same city, is
a curious and I believe a novel circumstance." Weld, Letter iv.
The Federal City (if it must be called a city) has not been much increased
since Mr. Weld visited it. Most of the public buildings, which were then in
some degree of forwardness, have been since utterly suspended. The Hotel is
already a ruin; a great part of its roof has fallen in, and the rooms are left to
be occupied gratuitously by the miserable Scotch and Irish emigrants. The
President's House, a very noble structure, is by no means suited to the philo-
sophical humility of its present possessor, who inhabits but a corner of the
mansion himself and abandons the rest to a state of uncleanly desolation, which
those who are not philosophers cannot look at without regret. This grand
edifice is encircled by a very rude pale, through which a common rustic stile
introduces the visitors of the first man in America. With respect to all that
is within the house, I shall imitate the prudent forbearance of Herodotus, and
say, τα (v απορρητω.
The private buildings exhibit the same characteristic display of arrogant
speculation and premature ruin, and the few ranges of houses which were begun
some years ago have remained so long waste and unfinished, that they are now
for the most part dilapidated.
Say, were your towering hills, your boundless floods,
Your rich savannas and majestic woods,
Where bards should meditate and heroes rove,
And woman charm and man deserve her love!
Oh ! was a world so bright but born to grace
Its own half-organiz’d, half-minded race5
Of weak barbarians, swarming o'er its breast,
Like vermin, gender'd on the lion's crest Ί
Were none but brutes to call that soil their home,
Where none but demi-gods should dare to roam?
Or worse, thou mighty world! oh ! doubly worse,
Did heaven design thy lordly land to nurse
The motley dregs of every distant clime,
£ach blast of anarchy and taint of crime,
Which Europe shakes from her perturbed sphere,
In full malignity to rankle here ?
5	The picture which Buffon and De Pauw have drawn of the American
Indian, though very humiliating, is, as far as I can judge, much more
correct than the flattering representations which Mr. Jeiferson has given us.
See the notes on Virginia, where this gentleman endeavours to disprove in
general the opinion maintained so strongly by some philosophers, that nature
(as Mr. Jefferson expresses it) be-littles her productions in the western world.
M. de Pauw attributes the imperfection of animal life in America to the
ravages of a very recent deluge, from whose effects upon its soil and atmosphere
it has not yet sufficiently recovered. See his Recherches sur les Americains,
Part I. Tom. i. p. 102.
But, hush!—observe that little mount of pines,
Where the breeze murmurs and the fire-fly shines,
There let thy fancy raise, in bold relief,
The sculptur’d image of that veteran chief6,
Who lost the rebel’s in the hero’s name,
And stept o'er prostrate loyalty to fame;
Beneath whose sword Columbia’s patriot train
Cast off their monarch, that their mob might reign !
How shall we rank thee upon glory’s page?
Thou more than soldier and just less than sage !
Too form'd for peace to act a conqueror's part,
Too train’d in camps to learn a statesman's art,
Nature design’d thee for a hero’s mould,
But, ere she cast thee, let the stuff grow cold !
While warmer souls command, nay make their fate,
Thy fate made thee and forc’d thee to be great.
Yet Fortune, who so oft, so blindly sheds
Her brightest halo round the weakest heads,
*	On a small hill near the capitol there is to be an equestrian statue of
General Washington.
Found thee undazzled, tranquil as before,
Proud to be useful, scorning to be more;
Less prompt at glory’s than at duty’s claim,
Renown the meed, but self-applause the aim;
All thou hast been reflects less fame on thee,
Far less than all thou hast forborn to be!
N ow turn thee, Hume, where faint the moon-light falls
On yonder dome—and in those princely halls,
If thou canst hate, as oh ! that soul must hate,
Which loves the virtuous and reveres the great,
If thou canst loath and execrate with me
That Gallic garbage of philosophy,
That nauseous slaver of these frantic times,
With which false liberty dilutes her crimes!
If thou hast got, within thy free-born breast,
One pulse, that beats more proudly than the rest,
With honest scorn for that inglorious soul,
Which creeps and winds beneath a mob’s controul,
Which courts the rabble’s smile, the rabble’s nod,
And makes, like Egypt, every beast its god !
There, in those walls—but, burning tongue, forbear!
Rank must be reverenc’d, even the rank that’s there:
So here I pause—and now, my Hume ! we part;
But oh! full oft, in magic dreams of heart,
Thus let us meet, and mingle converse dear
By Thames at home, or by Potowmac here!
O’er lake and marsh, through fevers and through fogs,
Midst bears and yankees, democrats and frogs,
Thy foot shall follow me, thy heart and eyes
With me shall wonder, and with me despise!
While I, as oft, in witching thought shall rove
To thee, to friendship, and that land I love,
Where, like the air that fans her fields of green,
Her freedom spreads, unfever’d and serene;
Where sovereign man can condescend to see
The throne and laws more sovereign still than he!
Once more, adieu!—my weary eye-lid winks,
The moon grows clouded and my taper sinks.
TU SEMPER AMORIS
SIS MEMOR, ET CARI COMITIS NE ABSCEDAT IMAGO.
Valerius Flaccus. Lib. iv.
LINES,
WRITTEN ON LEAVING PHILADELPHIA.
------	njvie	τψ	itoki*	φιλως
Ertwv sirafya γαρ.
Sophocl. (Edip. Colon, v. 758.
Alone by the Schuylkill a wanderer rov'd
And bright were^its flowery banks to his eye;
But far, very far were the friends that he lov'd,
And he gaz'd on its flowery banks with a sigh!
Oh Nature! though blessed and bright are thy rays,
O'er the brow of creation enchantingly thrown,
Yet faint are they all to the lustre, that plays
In a smile from the heart that is dearly our own!
Nor long did the soul of the stranger remain
Unblest by the smile he had languish’d, to meet;
Though scarce did he hope it would soothe him again,
Till the threshold of home had been kist by his feet!
But the lays of his boy-hood had stol’n to their ear,
And they lov’d what they knew of so humble a name,
And they told him, with flattery welcome and dear,
That they found in his heart something sweeter than fame!
Nor did woman—oh woman! whose form and whose soul
Are the spell and the light of each path we pursue;
Whether sunn’d in the tropics or chill’d at the pole,
If woman be there, there is happiness too !
Nor did she her enamouring magic deny,
That magic his heart had relinquish’d so long,
Like eyes he had lov’d was her eloquent eye,
Like them did it soften and weep at his song!
Oh! blest be the tear, and in memory oft
May its sparkle be shed o’er his wandering dream !
Oh ! blest be that eye, and may passion as soft,
As free from a pang ever mellow its beam!
The stranger is gone—but he will not forget,
When at home he shall talk of the toil he has known,
To tell, with a sigh, what endearments he met,
As he stray'd by the wave of the Schuylkill alone!
THE
FALL OF HEBE.
A DITHYRAMBIC ODE
Twas on a day
When the immortals at their banquet lay;
The bowl
Sparkled with starry dew,
1 Though I call this a Dithyrambic Ode, I cannot presume to say that it
possesses, in any degree, the characteristics of that species of poetry. The na-
ture of the ancient Dithyrambic, το διΒυρχμβωδες, is very imperfectly known.
According to M. Burette, a licentious irregularity of metre, an extravagant
research of thought and expression, and a rude embarrassed construction, are
among its most distinguishing features. He adds, “ Ces caract£res des
dityrambes se font sentir a ceux qui lisent attentivemeot les odes de Pindare.”
Memoires de l’Acad. vol. x. p. 306. And the same opinion may be collected
from Schmidt’s dissertation upon the subject.- But I think if the Dithyrambics
of Pindar were in our possession, we should find, that, however wild and fanciful,
they were by no means the tasteless jargon they are represented, and that even
The weeping of those myriad urns of light,
Within whose orbs, the almighty Power,
At nature’s dawning hour,
Stor’d the rich fluid of ethereal soul2!
Around
Soft odorous clouds, that upward wing their flight
From eastern isles,
their irregularity was what Boileau calls " un beau desordre.” Chiabrera,
who has been styled the Pindar of Italy, and from whom all its poetry upon
the Greek model was called Chiabreresco (as Crescimbeni informs us, Lib. i.
Cap. 12.) has given, amongst his Vendemmie, a Dithyrambic, ali' uso de*
Greci; it is full of those compound epithets, which, we are told, were a chief
character of the style (<τυνΒετχς 8s λεξας εποιχν, Suid. ΑιΒυραμβοΰώ.) i such as
Briglindorato Pegaso
Nubical pestator.
But I cannot suppose that Pindar, even amidst all the license of dithyrambics,
would ever have descended to ballad-language like the following:
Bella Filii, e bella Clori
Non piu dar pregio a tue bellezze e taci,
Che se Bacco fa vezzi alle mie labbra
Fo le fiche a’ vostri baci.
................esser vorrei Coppier,
E se troppo desiro
Deh fossi io Bottiglier.
Rime del Chiabrera, Part II. p. 352.
This is a Platonic fancy; the philosopher supposes, in his Timaeus, that,
when the Deity had formed the soul of the world, he proceeded to the compo-
(Where they have bath'd them in the orient ray,
And with fine fragrance all their bosoms fill’d,)
In circles flew, and melting, as they flew,
A liquid daybreak o’er the board distill'd !
All, all was luxury !
All must be luxury, where Lyaeus smiles!
His locks divine
Were crown’d
With a bright meteor-braid,
Which, like an ever-springing wreath of vine,
Shot into brilliant leafy shapes,
And o’er his brow in lambent tendriiTplay’d!
While ’mid the foliage hung,
Like lucid grapes,
A thousand clustering blooms of light,
Cull’d from the gardens of the galaxy !
sition of other souls; in which process, says Plato, he made use of the same
cup, though the ingredients he mingled were not quite so pure as for the
former; and having refined the mixture with a little of his own essence, he
distributed it among the stars, which served as reservoirs of the fluid. Τβυτ*
inrs xat παλιν eirt τ ον προηρον χρατηρχ fy ιί τψ τ» ποα/τος ψυ%»?ν χεραννυς ψισγξ
X. τ. λ.
Upon his bosom, Cytherea’s head
Lay lovely, as when first the Syrens sung
Her beauty’s dawn,
And all the curtains of the deep, undrawn,
Reveal’d her sleeping in its azure bed.
The captive deity
Languish’d upon her eyes and lip,
In chains of ecstasy!
Now, on his arm,
In blushes she repos’d,
And, while her zone resign’d its every charm,
To shade his burning eyes, her hand in dalliance stole.
And now she rais’d her rosy mouth to sip
The nectar’d wave
Lyaeus gave,
And from her eyelids, gently clos’d,
Shed a dissolving gleam,
Which fell, like sun-dew, in the bowl!
While her bright hair, in mazy flow
Of gold, descending
Along her cheek’s luxurious glow,
Wav’d o’er the goblet’s side,
And was reflected by its crystal tide,
Like a sweet crocus flower,
Whose sunny leaves, at evening hour,
With roses of Cyrene blending3,
Hang o’er the mirror of a silver stream!
The Olympian cup
Burn’d in the hands
Of dimpled Hebe, as she wing’d her feet
Up
The empyreal mount,
To drain the soul-drops at their stellar fount4;
And still,	^
As the resplendent rill
Flam’d o’er the goblet with a mantling heal,
Her graceful care
Would cool its heavenly fire
In gelid waves of snowy-feather’d air,
Such as the children of the pole respire,
In those enchanted lands5,
3	We learn from Theophrastus, that the roses of Cyrene were particularly
fragrant. EυοογΑατα τα ίί τ« (Τ Κυρηνη ροδα.
4	Heraclitus (Physicus) held the soul to be a spark of the stellar essence,
“ Scintilla stellaris essentiae.” Macrobius, in Somn. Scip. Lib. i. cap. 14.
s The country of the Hyperboreans; they were supposed to be placed so far
north, that the north wind could not affect them j they lived longer than any
Where life is all a spring, and north winds never blow!
But oh!
Sweet Hebe, what a tear,
And what a blush were thine,
When, as the breath of every Grace
Wafted thy fleet career
Along the studded sphere,
With a rich cup for Jove himself to drink,
Some star, that glitter’d in the way,
Raising its amorous head
To kiss so exquisite a tread,
Check'd thy impatient pace!
And all heaven's host of eyes
Saw those luxuriant beauties sink
In lapse of loveliness, along the azure skies*5!
other mortals; passed their whole time in music and dancing, &c. &c. But
the most extravagant Action related of them is that to which the two lines
preceding allude. It was imagined, that instead of our vulgar atmosphere, the
Hyperboreans breathed nothing but feathers! According to Herodotus and
Pliny, this idea was suggested by the quantity of snow which was observed to
fall in those regions; thus the former: Τα ΰν πτερά εικαζονιας τψ ·χ/ονα τϋς
ΧχνΒας τε χαι τας περιοιχχς ΰοχεω λεγιιν. Herodot. Lib. iv. cap. 31. Ovid
tells the fable otherwise. See Metamorph. Lib. xv.
β I believe it is Servius who mentions this unlucky trip which Hebe made
in her occupation of cup-bearer; and Hoffman tells it after him: “ Cum Hebe
“ Where are they all, so sweet, so many ?
“ Oh ! dearest, give back all, if any !”
While thus I murmur’d, trembling too
Lest all the nymph had vow’d was true,
I saw a smile relenting rise
'Mid the moist azure of her eyes,
Like day-light o'er a sea of blue,
While yet the air is dim with dew!
She let her cheek repose on mine,
She let my arms around her twine—
Oh ! who can tell the bliss one feels
In thus exchanging rings and seals!
TO
MISS SUSAN B-----------CKF-------D,
ON HER SINGING.
I more than once have heard, at night,
A song, like those thy lips have given,
And it was sung by shapes of light,
Who seem'd, like thee, to breathe of heaven!
But this was all a dream of sleep,
And I have said, when morning shone,
“ Oh! why should fairy Fancy keep
“ These wonders for herself alone V*
I knew not then that fate had lent
Such tones to one of mortal birth ;
I knew not then that heaven had sent
A voice, a form like thine on earth!
And yet, in all that flowery maze
Through which my life has lov'd to tread,
When I have heard the sweetest lays
From lips of dearest lustre shed;
When I have felt the warbled word
From beauty's mouth of perfume sighing,
Sweet as music's hallow'd bird
Upon a rose's bosom lying!
Though form and song at once combin'd
Their loveliest bloom and softest thrill,
My heart hath sigh'd, my heart hath pin'd
For something softer, lovelier still!
Oh ! I have found it all, at last,
In thee, thou sweetest living lyre,
Through which the soul hath ever pass'd
Its harmonizing breath of fire !
All that my best and wildest dream,
In fancy's hour, could hear or see
Of music's sigh or beauty's beam
Are realiz’d, at once, in thee!
LINES
WRITTEN AT
THE COHOS, OR FALLS OF THE MOHAWK RIVER\
CIA ERA IN LOCO OVE s’uDIA *L RIMBOMBO
DELL* ACQUA................
Dartfc.
From rise of morn till set of sun
I’ve seen the mighty Mohawk run,
And as I mark’d the woods of pine
Along his mirror darkly shine,
1	There is a dreary and savage character in the country immediately about
these Falls, which is much more in harmony with the wildness of such a scene,
than the cultivated lands in the neighbourhood of Niagara. See the drawing
of them in Mr. Weld’s book. According to him, the perpendicular height of
the Cohos Fall is fifty feet; but the Marquis de Chastellux make it seventy-
six.
The fine rainbow, which is continually forming and dissolving, as the spray
rises into the light of the sun, is perhaps the most interesting beauty which
these wonderful cataracts exhibit.
Like tall and gloomy forms that pass
Before the wizard’s midnight glass;
And as I view’d the hurrying pace
With which he ran his turbid* race,
Rushing, alike untir’d and wild
Through shades that frown’d and flowers that smil’d,
Flying by every green recess
That woo’d him to its calm caress,
Yet, sometimes turning with the wind,
As if to leave one look behind!
Oh ! I have thought, and thinking si gh’d—
How like to thee, thou restless tide !
May be the lot, the life of him,
Who roams along thy water’s brim !
Through what alternate shades of woe,
And flowers of joy my path may go !
How'' many an humble, still retreat
May rise to court my weary feet,
While still pursuing, still unblest,
I wander on, nor dare to rest !
But, urgent as the doom that calls
Thy water to its destin’d falls,
I see the world’s bewildering force
Hurry my heart’s devoted course
From lapse to lapse, till life be done,
And the lost current cease to run!
Oh may my falls be bright as thine !
May heaven’s forgiving rainbow shine
Upon the mist that circles me,
As soft, as now it hangs o’er thee!
TO
I often wish that thou wert dead,
And I beside thee calmly sleeping;
Since love is o’er and passion fled,
And life has nothing worth our keeping!
No —common souls may bear decline
Of all, that throbb’d them once so high;
But hearts, that beat like thine and mine,
Must still love on—love on or die !
’Tis true, our early joy was such,
That nature could not bear the excess!
It was too much—for life too much—
Though life be all a blank with less!
To see that eye, so cold, so still,
Which once, oh God! could melt in bliss—
No, no, 1 cannot bear the chill;
Hate, burning hate were heaven to this!
CLORIS AND FANNY.
Clorts ! if I were Persia’s king,
I'd make my graceful queen of thee;
While Fanny, wild and artless thing,
Should but thy humble handmaid be.
There is but one objection in it—
That, verily, I’m much afraid
I should, in some unlucky minute,
Forsake the mistress for the maid!
Upon whose starry plain they lay,
Like a young blossom on our meads of gold,
Shed from a vernal thorn
Amid the liquid sparkles of the morn!
Or, as in temples of the Paphian shade,
The myrtled votaries of the queen behold
An image of their rosy idol, laid
Upon a diamond shrine!
The wanton wind,
Which had pursued the flying fair,
And sweetly twin’d
Its spirit with the breathing rings
Of her ambrosial hair,
Soar’d as she fell, and on its ruffling wings,
(Oh wanton wind !)
Wafted the robe, whose sacred flow
Shadow’d her kindling charms of snow,
Pure, as an Eleusinian veil
pocula Jovi administrans, perque lubricum minus caute incedens, cecidisset,
revolutisque vestibus”—in short, she fell in a very awkward manner, and
though (as the Encyclopedistes think) it would have amused Jove at any other
time, yet, as he happened to be out of temper on that day, the poor girl was
dismissed from her employment.
Hangs o’er the mysteries1!
* * * *
* the brow of Juno flush’d—
Love bless’d the breeze !
The Muses blush’d,
And every cheek was hid behind a lyre,
While every eye was glancing through the strings.
Drops of ethereal dew,
That burning gush’d,
As the great goblet flew
From Hebe’s pearly fingers through the sky!
Who was the spirit that remember’d Man
In that voluptuous hour?
And with a wing of love	:
Brush’d off* your scatter’d tears,
As o’er the spangled heaven they ran,
And sent them floating to our orb below8 ?
7	The arcane symbols of this ceremony were deposited in the cista, where
they lay religiously concealed from the eyes of the profane. They were gene-
rally carried in the procession by an ass j and hence the proverb, which one may
so often apply in the world, ** asinus portat mysteria.” See the Divine Lega-
tion, Book ii. sect. 4.
*	In the Geoponica, Lib. ii. cap. 17. there is a fable somewhat like this de-
scent of the nectar to earth. Ev tspocvu των Bsuv ενωχΗμενων, nat τα νεχταρας
Essence of immortality!
The shower
Fell glowing through the spheres ;
While all around new tints of bliss,
New perfumes of delight,
Enrich’d its radiant flow!
Now, with a humid kiss,
It thrill’d along the beamy wire
Of Heaven’s illumin’d lyre9,
Stealing the soul of music in its flight!
And now, amid the breezes bland,
That whisper from the planets as they roll,
The bright libation, softly fann’d
By all their sighs, meandering stole !
They who, from Atlas’ height,
ττολλϋ παρακείμενα^ ava<rxipTYt<roci χορεία τον Ερωτα και <rv<r<rsi<rai τω πτερω τα χρατ ϊΐρος
τψ βατιν, και περιτρ-φαι μεν αυτόν’ το δί νεχταρ ας τίν γψ εχχυΒεν κ. τ. λ. Vid.
Autor. de Re Rust. edit. Cantab. 1704.
9	The constellation Lyra. The astrologers attribute great virtues to this
sign in ascendenti, which are enumerated by Pontano, in his Urania:
----Ecce novem cum pectine chordas
Emodulans, mulcet que novo vaga sidera cantu,
Quo captae nascentum animae concordia ducunt
Pectora, &c.
Digitized by boogie ^
_ί
Beheld the rill of flame
Descending through the waste of night,
Thought *twas a planet, whose stupendous frame
Had kindled, as it rapidly revolv’d
Around its fervid axle, and dissolv’d
Into a flood so bright!
The child of day,
Within his twilight bower,
Lay sweetly sleeping
On the flush’d bosom of a lotos-flower1®;
When round him, in profusion weeping,
Dropp’d the celestial shower,
Steeping
The rosy clouds, that curl’d
About his infant head,
Like myrrh upon the locks of Cupid shed !
10	The Egyptians represented the dawn of day by a young boy seated upon
a lotos. Em Αιγυτπχς Ιωρακως αρχήν ανατολής παώιον ηογνον γραφοντας eiri λωτω
)νχ3ίζομίνον. Plutarch, πψ τα μη χραν εμμετρ. See also his treatise de Isid. et
Osir. Observing that the lotos shewed its head above water at sunrise, and
sank again at his setting, they conceived the idea of consecrating it to Osiris,
or the sun.
This symbol of a youth sitting upon a lotos, is very frequent on the
Abraxases, or Basilidian stones. See Montfaucon, tom. ii. planche 158, and
the “ Supplement,” &c. tom. ii. lib. vii. chap. 5.
But, when the waking boy
Wav’d his exhaling tresses through the sky,
0	morn of joy !
The tide divine,
All glittering with the vermil dye
It drank beneath his orient eye,
Distill’d, in dews, upon the world,
And every drop was wine, was heavenly wine !
Blest be the sod, the flowret blest,
That caught, upon their hallow’d breast,
The nectar’d spray of Jove’s perennial springs!
Less sweet the flowret, and less sweet the sod,
O’er which the Spirit of the rainbow flings
The magic mantle of her solar god11!
11	The ancients esteemed those flowers and trees the sweetest upon which
the rainbow had appeared to rest; and the wood they chiefly burned in sacri-
fices, was that which the smile of Iris had consecrated. Plutarch. Sympos.
lib. iv. cap. 2. where (as Vossius remarks) xam<ny instead of καλ«σ7, is undoubt-
edly the genuine reading. See Vossius, for some curious particularities of the
rainbow, De Origin, et Progress. Idololat. lib. iii. cap. 13.
That wrinkle, when first I espied it,
At once put my heart out of pain,
Till the eye, that was glowing beside it,
Disturb’d my ideas again !
Thou art just in the twilight at present,
When woman’s declension begins,
When, fading from all that is pleasant,
She bids a good night to her sins!
Yet thou still art so lovely to me,
I would sooner, my exquisite mother!
Repose in the sun-set of thee,
Than bask in the noon of another!
ANACREONTIC.
“ She never look’d so kind before—
“ Yet why the wanton's smile recall ?
“ I've seen this witchery o’er and o’er,
“ ’Tis hollow, vain and heartless all!”
Thus I said and, sighing, sipp’d
The wine which she had lately tasted;
The cup, where she had lately dipp’d
Breath, so long in falsehood wasted.
I took the harp, and would have sung
As if ’twere not of her I sang;
But still the notes on Lamia hung—
On whom but Lamia could they hang?
That kiss, for which, if worlds were mine,
A world for every kiss Pd give her;
Those floating eyes, that floating shine,
Like diamonds in an eastern river !
That mould so fine, so pearly bright,
Of which luxurious heaven hath cast her,
Through which her soul doth beam as white
As flame through lamps of alabaster!
Of these I sung, and notes and words
Were sweet, as if ’twas Lamia’s hair
That lay upon my lute for chords,
And Lamia’s lip that warbled there !
But when, alas ! I turn’d the theme,
And when of vows and oaths I spoke,
Of truth and hope’s beguiling dream—
The chord beneath my finger broke !
False harp i false woman !—such, oh ! such
Are lutes too frail and maids too willing;
Every hand’s licentious touch
Can learn to wake their wildest thrilling !
And when that thrill is most awake,
And when you think heaven's joys await you*
The nymph will change, the chord will break—
Oh Love! oh Music! how I hate you!
TO
MRS. ------------
ON SOME CALUMNIES AGAINST HER CHARACTER.
Is not thy mind a gentle mind ?
Is not thy heart a heart refin'd ?
Hast thou not every blameless grace,
That man should love or heaven can trace ?
And oh! art thou a shrine for Sin
To hold her hateful worship in?
No, no, be happy—dry that tear—
Though some thy heart hath harbour'd near
May now repay its love with blame;
Though man, who ought to shield thy fame,
Ungenerous man be first to wound thee;
Though the whole world may freeze around thee,
, V
Oh ! thou’lt be like that lucid tear1,
Which, bright, within the chrystal’s sphere
In liquid purity was found,
Though all had grown congeal’d around;
Floating in frost, it mock’d the chill,
Was pure, was soft, was brilliant still!
1 This alludes to a curious gem, upon which Claudian has left us some
pointless epigrams. It was a drop of pure water inclosed within a piece of
chrystal. See Claudian. Epigram, de Chrystallo cui aqua inerat. Addison
mentions a curiosity of this kind at Milan; he also says, “ It is such a rarity
as this that I saw at Vendome in France, which they there pretend is a tear
that our Saviour shed over Lazarus, and was gathered up by an angel, who put
it in a little chrystal vial and made a present of it to Mary Magdalen.'*
Addison’s Remarks on several parts of Italy.
HYMN
OF
A VIRGIN OF DELPHI
AT THE TOMB OF HER MOTHER.
Oh! lost; for ever lost!—no more
Shall Vesper light our dewy way
Along the rocks of Crissa*s shore,
To hymn the fading fires of day!
No more to Tempos distant vale
In holy musings shall we roam,
Through summer's glow and winter's gale*
To bear the mystic chaplets home 1!
1 The laurel, for the common uses of the temple, for adorning the altars and
sweeping the pavement, was supplied by a tree near the fountain of Castalia;
but upon all important occasions, they sent to Tempe for their laurel. We
find in Pausanias, that this valley supplied the branches, of which the temple
was originally constructed; and Plutarch says, in his Dialogue on Music,
“ The youth who brings the Tempic laurel to Delphi is always attended by a
player on the flute." Αλλα pjv xat τω xoctακομιζοντι παιδί τψ Ύίγ,πιχην δαφνηψ
ίΐς Αελφϋς τταρορχρτε* αυλητης.
'Twas then my sours expanding zeal,
By nature warm'd and led by thee,
In eveiy breeze was
The breathings of a deity !
Guide of my heart! to memory true,
Thy looks, thy words, are still my own—
I see thee raising from the dew,
Some laurel, by the wind o'erthrown,
And hear thee say, “ This humble bough
“ Was planted for a doom divine,
“ And, though it weep in languor now,
“ Shall flourish on the Delphic shrine!
“ Thus, in the vale of earthly sense,
“ Though sunk awhile the spirit lies,
“ A viewless hand shall cull it thence,
“ To bloom immortal in the skies!”
Thy words had such a melting flow,
And spoke of truth so sweetly well,
They dropp'd like heaven's serenest snow,
And all was brightness where they fell!
Fond soother of my infant tear !
Fond sharer of my infant joy!
Is not thy shade still lingering here ?
Am I not still thy soul’s employ ?
taught to feel
And oh! as oft, at close of day
When, meeting on the sacred mount,
Our nymphs awak’d the choral lay,
And danc’d around Cassotis’ fount;
As then, ’twas all thy wish and care,
That mine should be the simplest mien,
My lyre and voice the sweetest there,
My foot the lightest o’er the green:
So still, each little grace to mould,
Around my form thine eyes are shed,
Arranging every snowy fold,
And guiding every mazy tread !
And, when I lead the hymning choir,
Thy spirit still, unseen and free,
Hovers between my lip and lyre,
And weds them into harmony !
Flow, Plistus, flow, thy murmuring wave
Shall never drop its silv’ry tear
Upon so pure, so blest a grave,
To memory so divinely dear!
RINGS AND SEALS.
rpfayjfr; ra ftXypara.
Achilles Tatty*, Lib. ii.
“ Go!” said the angry, weeping maid,
" The charm is broken !—once betray’d,
“ Oh! never can my heart rely	-
“ On word oj* look, on oath, or sigh. , ■*
“ Take back the, gifts, so sweetly given,
“ With promis’d faith and vows to heaven;
“ That little ring which, night and morn,
“ With wedded truth my hand hath worn;
“ That seal, which oft in moments blest,
“ Thou hast upon my lip imprest,
“ And sworn its dewy spring should be
“ A fountain seal’d1 for only thee!”
1 “ There are gardens, supposed to be those of King Solomon, in the
n^igjibpurhpod of Bethlehem. The friars shevy a fountain, which they say is
“ Take, take them back, the gift and vow»
“ All sullied, lost and hateful now!”
I took the ring—the seal I took,
While oh ! her every tear and look
Were such as angels look and shed,
When man is by the world misled !
Gently I whisper’d, “ Fanny, dear!
i( Not half thy lovers gifts are here :
“ Say, where are all the seals he gave
“ To every ringlet’s jetty wave,
*( And where is every one he printed
“ Upon that lip, so ruby-tinted,
tf Seals, of the purest gem of bliss,
“ Oh! richer, softer, far than this!
f
“ And then the ring—my love ! recall
“ How many rings, delicious all,
“ His arms around that neck hath twisted»
“ Twining warmer far than this did!
« %
t
the * sealed fountain’ to which the holy spouse in the Canticles is compared f
and they pretend a tradition, that Solomon shut up these springs and put his
.signet upon the door, to keep them for his own drinking." Maundrell'e
Travels. See also the notes to Mr. Good’s Translation of the Song of Solomon*
ON
A BEAUTIFUL EAST-INDIAN.
If all the daughters of the sun
Have loving looks and hearts of flame,
Go, tell me not that she is one—
’Twas from the wintry moon she came!
And yet, sweet eye ! thou ne’er wert given
To kindle what thou dost not feel;
And yet, thou flushing lip—by heaven!
Thou ne’er wert made for Dian’s seal!
Oh ! for a sunbeam, rich and warm
From thy own Ganges’ fervid haunts,
To light thee up, thou lovely form!
To all my soul adores and wants:
To see thee burn—to faint and si gh
Upon that bosom as it blaz’d,
And be, myself, the first to die
Amid the flame myself had rais’d I
TO
MISS -
WiTH woman's form and woman's tricks
So much of man you seem to mix,
One knows not where to take you:
I pray you, if ’tis not too far,
Go, ask of Nature which you are,
Or what she meant to make you.
Yet stay—you need not take the pains—
With neither beauty, youth nor brains
For man or maid's desiring;
Pert as female, fool as male,
As boy too green, as girl too stale—
The thing's not worth enquiring!
TO
ON HER ASKING ME TO ADDRESS A POEM TO HER.
SINE VENERE FK1GET APOLLO.
JBgid. Menagius.
How can I sing of fragrant sighs
I ne’er have felt from thee ?
How can I sing of smiling eyes,
That ne’er have smil’d on me ?
The heart, ’tis true, may fancy much,
But, oh! ’tis cold and seeming—
One moment’s real, rapturous touch
Is worth an age of dreaming!
Think’st thou, when Julia’s lip and breast
Inspir’d my youthful tongue,
I coldly spoke of lips unprest,
Nor felt the heaven I sung?
»
No, no, the spell, that warm’d so long,
Was still my Julia’s kiss,
And still the girl was paid, in song,
What she had giv’n, in bliss!
Then beam one burning smile on me,
And I will sing those eyes;
Let me but feel a breath from thee,
And I will praise thy sighs.
That rosy mouth alone can bring
What makes the bard divine—
Oh Lady! how my lip would sing,
If once 'twere prest to thine!
SONG
or
THE EVIL SPIRIT OF THE WOODS1.
QUA VIA DirriCILIS, QUAQUE EST ΤΙΛ MULLA.................
Ovid. Melam, Lib. iii. ▼. 227.
Now the vapour, hot and damp,
Shed by day's expiring lamp,
Through the misty ether spreads
Every ill the white man dreads;
Fiery fever’s thirsty thrill,
Fitful ague's shivering chill!
Hark! I hear the traveller's song,
As he winds the woods along!
1 The idea of this poem occurred to me in passing through the veiy dreary
wilderness between Batavia, a new settlement in the midst of the woods, and
the little village of Buffalo upon Lake Erie. This is the most fatiguing part
of the route, in travelling through the Genesee country to Niagara.
Christian ! ’tis the song of fear;
Wolves are round thee, night is near,
And the wild, thou dar’st to roam—
Oh ! ’twas once the Indian’s home2!
Hither, sprites, who love to harm,
Wheresoe’er you work your charm,
By the creeks, or by the brakes,
Where the pale witch feeds her snakes,
And the cayman3 loves to creep,
Torpid, to his wintry sleep r
Where the bird of carrion flits,
And the shuddering murderer sits4,
s “ The Five Confederated Nations (of Indians) were settled along the banks
of the Susquehannah and the adjacent country, until the year 1779» when
General Sullivan, with an army of 4000 men, drove them from their country
to Niagara, where being obliged to live on salted provisions, to which they were
unaccustomed, great numbers of them died. Two hundred of them, it is said,
were buried in one grave, where they had encamped.” Morse’s American
Geography.
9 The alligator, who is supposed to lie in a torpid state all the winter, in
the bank of some creek or pond, having previously swallowed a large number
of pine-knots, which are his only sustenance during the time.
4 This was the mode of punishment for murder (as Father Charlevoix tells us)
among the Hurons. “ They laid the dead body upon poles at the top of a
Lone beneath a roof of blood,
While, upon his poison’d food,
From the corpse of him he slew
Drops the chill and gory dew !
Hither bend you, turn you hither
Ey es that blast and wings that wither!
Cross the wandering Christian’s way,
Lead him, ere the glimpse of day,
Many a mile of mad’ning error
Through the maze of night and terror,
Till the morn behold him lying
O’er the damp earth, pale and dying!
Mock him, when his eager si ght
Seeks the cordial cottage-light;
Gleam then, like the lightning-bug,
Tempt him to the den that’s dug
For the foul and famish’d brood
Of the she-wolf, gaunt for blood!
Or, unto the dangerous pass
O’er the deep and dark morass,
cabin, and the murderer was obliged to remain several days together, and to
receive all that dropped from the carcass, not only on himself but on his food/'
Where the trembling Indian brings
Belts of porcelain, pipes and rings,
Tributes, to be hung in air
To the Fiend presiding there5!
Then, when night’s long labour past,
Wilder’d, faint he falls at last,
Sinking where the cause-way’s edge
Moulders in the slimy sedge,
There let every noxious thing
Trail its filth and fix its sting;
Let the bull-toad taint him over,
Round him let musquitoes hover,
In his ears and eye-balls tingling,
With his blood their poison mingling,
Till, beneath the solar fires,
Rankling all, the wretch expires!
3	“ We find also collars of porcelain, tobacco, ears of maize, skins, &c. by the
side of difficult and dangerous ways, on rocks, or by the side of the falls; and
these are so many offerings made to the spirits which preside in these places.”
See Charlevoix’s Letter on the Traditions and the Religion of the Savages of
Canada.
Father Hennepii^too mentions this ceremony; he also says, “We took
notice of one barbarian, who made a kind of sacrifice upon an oak at the
Cascade of St. Antony of Padua, upon the river Mississippi.” See Hennepin’s
Voyage into North America.
TO
MRS. HENRY T-------------GHE,
ON READING HER
“ PSYCHE.”
1803.
Tell me the witching tale again,
For never has my heart or ear
Hung on so sweet, so pure a strain,
So pure to feel, so sweet to hear!
Say, Love ! in all thy spring of fame,
When the high heaven itself was thine;
When piety confess'd the flame,
And even thy errors were divine I
Did ever Muse’s hand, so fair,
A glory round thy temples spread ?
Did ever lip’s ambrosial air
Such perfume o’er thy altars shed ?
One maid there was, who round her lyre
The mystic myrtle wildly wreath’d—
But all her sighs were sighs of fire,
The myrtle wither’d, as she breath’d !
Oh ! you, that love’s celestial dream,
In all its purity, would know,
Let not the senses’ ardent beam
Too strongly through the vision glow!
Love sweetest lies, conceal’d in night,
The night where heaven has bid him lie;
Oh ! shed not there unhallow’d light,
Or, Psyche knows, the boy will fly1!
1 See the story in Apuleius. With respect to this beautiful allegory of Love
and Psyche, there is an ingenious idea suggested by the senator Buonarotti, in
his “ Osservazioni sopra alcuni frammenti di vasi antichi.” He thinks the
fable is taken from some very occult mysteries, which had long been celebrated
in honour of Love; and he accounts, upon this supposition, for the silence of
the more ancient authors upon the subject, as it was not till towards the decline
of pagan superstition, that writers could venture to reveal or discuss such cere-
monies: accordingly, he observes, we find Lucian and Plutarch treating, with-
out reserve, of the Dea Syria, and Isis and Osiris; and Apuleius, who nas given
us the story of Cupid and Psyche, has also detailed some of the mysteries of
Isis. See the Giomale di Litterati d’ Italia, Tom. xxvii. Articol. 1. See also
Dear Psyche ! many a charmed hour,
Through many a wild and magic waste,
To the fair fount and blissful bower2
Thy mazy foot my soul hath trac'd I
Where’er thy joys are number'd now,
Beneath whatever shades of rest,
The Genius of the starry brow3
Has chain'd thee to thy Cupid's breast;
Whether above the horizon dim,
Along whose verge our spirits stray,
(Half sunk within the shadowy brim,
Half brighten'd by the eternal ray4)
the observations upon the ancient gems in the Museum Florentinum, Vol. i.
p. 156.
I cannot avoid remarking here an error into which the French Encyclope-
distes have been led by M. Spon, in their article Psyche. They say “ Petrone
fait un recit de la pompe nuptiale de ces deux amans (Amour & Psyche).
Deja, dit-il, &c. &c.” The Psyche of Petronius, however, is a servant-maid, and
the marriage which he describes is that of the young Pannychis. See Spon’s
Recherches curieuses, &c. Dissertat. 5.
8	Allusions to Mrs. T—ghe’s poem.	*	Constancy.
4 By this image the Platonists expressed the middle state of the soul between
sensible aud intellectual existence.
Thou risest to a cloudless pole!
Or, lingering here, dost love to mark
The twilight walk of many a soul
Through sunny good and evil dark;
Still be the song to Psyche dear,
The song, whose dulcet tide was given,
To keep her name as fadeless, here,
As nectar keeps her soul, in heaven!
IMPROMPTU,
UPON LEAFING SOME FRIENDS.
O DULCES COMITUM VALETE CCBTUs!
Catullus.
No, never shall my soul forget
The friends I found so cordial-hearted;
Dear shall be the day we met,
And dear shall be the night we parted!
Oh ! if regrets, however sweet,
Must with the lapse of time decay,
Yet still, when thus in mirth you meet,
Fill high to him that’s far away !
Long be the flame of memory found,
Alive, within your social glass,
Let that be still the magic round,
O’er which oblivion dares not pass!
TO
I know that none can smile like thee,
But there is one, a gentler one,
Whose heart, though young and wild it be,
Would ne’er have done, as thine lias done.
When we were left alone to-day,
When every curious eye was fled,
And all that love could look or say,
We might have look’d, we might have said;
Would she have felt me trembling press,
Nor trembling press to me again?
Would she have had the power to bless,
Yet want the heart to bless me then ?
Her tresses too, as soft as thine—
Would she have idly paus’d to twine
Their scatter’d locks, with cold delay,
While oh ! such minutes pass’d away,
As heaven has made for those who love,
For those who love, and long to steal
What none but hearts of ice reprove,
What none but hearts of fire can feel!
Go, go—an age of vulgar years
May now be pin’d, be sigh’d away,
Before one blessed hour appears,
Like that which we have lost to-day!
EPISTLE VIII
το
THE HONOURABLE W. R. SPENCER.
FROM BUFFALO, UPON LAKE ERIE.
NEC VENIT AD DUROS MUSA VOCATA CETAS.
Ocid. ex Panto, Lib. i. Ep. 5.
Thou oft hast told me of the fairy hours
Thy heart has number’d, in those classic bowers,
Where fancy sees the ghost of ancient wit
’Mid cowls and cardinals profanely flit,
And pagan spirits, by the Pope unlaid,
Haunt every stream and sing through every shade!
There still the bard, who, (if his numbers be
His tongue’s light echo,) must have talk’d like thee,
L L
The courtly bard, from whom thy mind has caught
Those playful, sunshine holidays of thought,
In which the soul with easy bask reclines,
Gay without toil and resting while she shines!
There still he roves, and laughing loves to see
How modern monks with ancient rakes agree;
How mitres hang, where ivy wreaths might twine,
And heathen Massic's damn’d for stronger wine!
There too are all those wandering souls of song,
With whom thy spirit hath commun'd so long,
Whose rarest gems are, every instant, hung
By memory's magic on thy sparkling tongue.
But here, alas! by Erie's stormy lake,
As, far from thee, my lonely course I take,
No bright remembrance o’er the fancy plays,
No classic dream, no star of other days
Has left that visionary glory here,
That relic of its light, so soft, so dear,
Which gilds and hallows even the rudest scene,
The humblest shed, where genius once has been!
All that creation’s varying mass assumes
Of grand or lovely, here aspires and blooms;
Bold rise the mountains, rich the gardens glow,
Bright lakes expand and conquering* rivers flow;
Mind, mind alone, without whose quickening ray,
The world’s a wilderness and man but clay,
Mind, mind alone, in barren, still repose,
Nor blooms, nor rises, nor expands, nor flows!
Take Christians, mohawks, democrats and all
From the rude wig-wam to the congress-hall,
From man the savage, whether slav’d or free,
To man the civiliz’d, less tame than he!
’Tis one dull chaos, one unfertile strife
Betwixt half-polish’d and half-barbarous life;
Where every ill the ancient world can brew
Is mix’d with every grossness of the new;
Where all corrupts, though little can entice,
And nothing’s known of luxury, but its vice!
1 This epithet was suggested by Charlevoix’s striking description of the
confluence of the Missouri with the Mississippi. u I believe this is the finest
confluence in the world. The two rivers are much of the same breadth, each
about half a league; but the Missouri is by far the most rapid, and seems to
enter the Mississippi like a conqueror, through which it carries its white waves
to the opposite shore without mixing them: afterwards it gives its colour to
the Mississippi, which it never loses again, but carries quite down to the sea.”
Letter xxvii.
Is this the region then, is this the clime
For golden fancy ? for those dreams sublime,
Which all their miracles of light reveal
To heads that meditate and hearts that feel ?
No, no—the muse of inspiration plays
O’er every scene; she walks the forest-maze,
And climbs the mountain; every blooming spot
Burns with her step, yet man regards it not!
She whispers round, her words are in the air,
But lost, unheard, they linger freezing there,
Without one breath of soul, divinely strong,
One ray of heart to thaw them into song!
Yet, yet forgive me, oh you sacred few !
Whom late by Delaware’s green banks I knew;
Whom, known and lov’d through many a social eve,
’Twas bliss to live with and ’twas pain to leave2!
*	In the society of Mr. Dennie and his friends, at Philadelphia, I passed the
only agreeable moments which my tour through the States afforded me. Mr.
Dennie has succeeded in diffusing through this elegant little circle that love for
good literature and sound politics, which he feels so zealously himself, and
which is so very rarely the characteristic of his countrymen. They will not, I
trust, accuse me of illiberality for the picture which I have given of the igno-
rance and corruption that surround them. If I did not hate, as I ought, the
Less dearly welcome were the lines of lore
The exile saw upon the sandy sRore,
When his lone heart but faintly hop’d to find
One print of man, one blessed stamp of mind!
Less dearly welcome than the liberal zeal,
The strength to reason and the warmth to feel,
The manly polish and the illumin’d taste,
Which, ’mid the melancholy, heartless waste
My foot has wander’d, oh you sacred few!
I found by Delaware’s green banks with you.
Long may you hate the Gallic dross that runs
O’er your fair country and corrupts its sons;
Long love the arts, the glories which adorn
Those fields of freedom, where your sires were born.
Oh ! if America can yet be great,
If neither chain’d by choice, nor damn’d by fate
To the mob-mania which imbrutes her now,
She yet can raise the bright but temperate brow
Of single majesty, can grandly place
An empire’s pillar upon freedom’s base,
rabble to which they are opposed, I could not value, os I do, the spirit with
which they defy it; and in learning from them what Americans can be, I but see
with the more indignation what Americans are.
Nor fear the mighty shaft will feebler prove
For the fair capital that flowers above !—
If yet, releas'd from all that vulgar throng,
So vain of dulness and so pleas'd with wrong,
Who hourly teach her, like themselves, to hide
Folly in froth and barrenness in pride,
She yet can rise, can wreathe the attic charms
Of soft refinement round the pomp of arms,
And see her poets flash the fires of song,
To light her warriors' thunderbolts along!
It is to you, to souls that favouring heaven
Has made like yours, the glorious task is given—
Oh ! but for such, Columbia’s days were done;
Rank without ripeness, quicken’d without sun,
Crude at the surface, rotten at the core,
Her fruits would fall, before her spring were o'er!
Believe me, Spencer, while I wing'd the hours
Where Schuylkill undulates through banks of flowers,
Though few the days, the happy evenings few,
So warm with heart, so rich with mind they flew,
That my full soul forgot its wish to roam,
And rested there, as in a dream of home!
And looks I met, like looks I lov’d before,
And voices too, which as they trembled o’er
The chord of memory, found full many a tone
Of kindness there in concord with their own !
Oh ! we had nights of that communion free,
That flush of heart, which I have known with thee
So oft, so warmly; nights of mirth and mind,
Of whims that taught and follies that refin’d !
When shall we both renew them ? when, restor’d
To the pure feast and intellectual board,
Shall I once more enjoy with thee and thine
Those whims that teach, those follies that refine ?
Even now, as, wandering upon Erie’s shore,
I hear Niagara’s distant cataract roar,
I sigh for England—oh! these weary feet
Have many a mile to journey, ere we meet!
Π ΠΑΤΡΙΣ, ΏΣ ΣΟΤ ΚΑΡΤΑ NTN ΜΝΕΙΑΝ ΕΧΠ.
Euripides.
%
A WARNING.
TO
Oh ! fair as heaven and chaste as light!
Did nature mould thee all so bright,
That thou shouldst ever learn to weep
O’er languid virtue’s fatal sleep,
O’er shame extinguish’d, honour fled,
Peace lost, heart wither’d, feeling dead ?
No, no ! a star was bom with thee,
Which sheds eternal purity!
Thou hast, within those sainted eyes,
So fair a transcript of the skies,
In lines of fire such heavenly lore,
That man should read them and adore !
Yet have I known a gentle maid
Whose early charms were just array’d
In nature’s loveliness like thine,
And wore that clear, celestial sign,
Which seems to mark the brow that’s fair
For destiny’s peculiar care !
Whose bosom too was once a zone,
Where the bright gem of virtue shone;
Whose eyes were talismans of fire
Against the spell of man’s desire !
Yet, hapless girl, in one sad hour,
Her charms have shed their radiant flower;
The gem has been beguil’d away;
Her eyes have lost their chastening ray;
The simple fear, the guiltless shame,
The smiles that from reflection came,
All, all have fled, and left her mind
A faded monument behind !
Like some wave-beaten, mouldering stone,
To memory rais’d by hands unknown,
Which, many a wintry hour, has stood
Beside the ford of Tyra’s flood,
To tell the traveller, as he crost,
That there some loved friend was lost!
Oh ! ’twas a sight I wept to see—
Heaven keep the lost-one’s fate from thee!	'
TO
Tis time, I feel, to leave thee now,
While ^yet my soul is something free;
While yet those dangerous eyes allow
One moment’s thought to stray from thee!
Oh ! thou art every instant dearer—
Every chance that brings me nigh thee,
Brings my ruin nearer, nearer,
I	am lost, unless I fly thee!
Nay, if thou dost not scorn and hate me.
Wish me not so soon to fall,
Duties, fame and hopes await me,
Oh! that eye would blast them all i
Yes, yes, it would—for thou’rt as cold
As ever yet allur’d or sway’d,
And would’st, without a sigh, behold
The ruin which thyself had made!
Yet—could I think that, truly fond,
That eye but once would smile on me,
Good heaven! how much, how far beyond
Fame, duty, hope that smile would be!
Oh ! but to win it, night and day,
Inglorious at thy feet reclin’d,
I’d sigh my dreams of fame away,
The world for thee forgot, resign’d!
But no, no, no—farewell—we part,
Never to meet, no, never, never—
Oh woman! what a mind and heart
Thy coldness has undone for ever!
FROM
THE HIGH-PR1EST OF APOLLO
TO
A VIRGIN OF DELPHI'.
CUM DIGNO DIGNA..............
Sulpicia.
“ Who is the maid, with golden hair,
“ With eyes of fire and feet of air,
“ Whose harp around my altar swells,
“ The sweetest of a thousand shells V*
1 This poem requires a little explanation. It is well known that, in the
ancient temples, whenever a reverend priest, like the supposed author of the
invitation before us, was inspired with a tender inclination towards any fair
visitor of the shrine, and, at the same time, felt a diffidence in his own powers
of persuasion, he had but to proclaim that the God himself was enamoured
of her, and had signified his divine will that she should sleep in the interior of
*Twas thus the deity, who treads
The arch of heaven, and grandly sheds
Day from his eye-lids !—thus he spoke,
As through my cell his glories broke.
“ Who is the maid, with golden hair,
“ With eyes of fire and feet of air,
“ Whose harp around my altar swells,
“ The sweetest of a thousand shells V*
Aphelia is the Delphic fair 2,
With eyes of fire and golden hair,
the temple. Many a pious husband connived at this divine assignation, and
even declared himself proud of the selection, with which his family had been
distinguished by the deity. In the temple of Jupiter Belus there was a splendid
bed for these occasions. In Egyptian Thebes the same mockery was practised,
and at the oracle of Patara in Lycia, the priestess never could prophesy till
an interview with the deity was allowed her. The story which we read in
Josephus (Lib. xviii. cap. 3) of the Roman matron Paulina, whom the priests
of Isis, for a bribe, betrayed in this manner to Mundus, is a singular instance
of the impudent excess to which credulity suffered these impostures to
be carried. This story has been put into the form of a little novel, under
the name of “ La Pudicitia Schernita,” by the licentious and unfortunate
Pallavicino. See his Opere Scelte, Tom. i. I have made my priest here prefer
a cave to the temple.
*	In the 9th Pythic of Pindar, where Apollo, in the same manner, requires
of Chiron some information respecting the fair Cyrene, the Centaur, in obeying,
Aphelia’s are the airy feet,
And hers the harp divinely sweet;
For foot so light has never trod
The laurel* d caverns3 of the god,
Nor harp so soft has ever given
A strain to earth or sigh to heaven!
“ Then tell the virgin to unfold,
“ In looser pomp, her locks of gold,
And bid those eyes with fonder fire
“ Be kindled for a god’s desire4;
“ Since He, .who lights the path of years—
“ Even from the fount of morning’s tears,
“ To where his setting splendours burn
“ Upon the western sea-maid’s urn—
“ Cannot, in all his course, behold
M Such eyes of fire, such hair of gold!
very gravely apologizes for telling the God what his omniscience must know
so perfectly already:
E/ if γί xpti και Trap <τοφον αντιφεριξαι
Epsu'
*	Αλλ’ εις δαφνωδη γυαλα βη<το^ι τ«5ί. Euripid. Ion. v. 76.
4	Ne deve partorir ammiratione ch’egli si pregiasse di haver una Deita con-
corrente nel possesso della moglie; mentre anche nei nostri secoli, non ostante
cosi rigorose legge d’onore, trovasi chi s’ascrive a gloria il veder la moglie
honorata da gl’amplessi di un Principe. Pallavicino.
m
“ Tell her, he comes, in blissful pride,
“ His lip yet sparkling with the tide,
“ That mantles in Olympian bowls,
“ The nectar of eternal souls!
“ For her, for her he quits the skies,
“ And to her kiss from nectar flies.
“ Oh! he would hide his wreath of rays,
“ And leave the world to pine for days,
** Might he but pass the hours of shade,
“ Imbosom’d by his Delphic maid,
“ She, more than earthly woman blest,
“ He, more than god on woman’s breast! ”
There is a cave beneath the steep5,
Where living rills of crystal weep
O’er herbage, of the loveliest hue
That ever spring begem’d with dew,
There oft the green bank’s glossy tint
Is brighten’d by the amorous print
Of many a faun and naiad's form,
That still upon the dew is warm,
5	The Corycian Cave, which Pausanias mentions. The inhabitants of Par·
nassus held it sacred to the Corycian nymphs, who were children of the river
Plistus.
When virgins come, at peep of day,
To kiss the sod where lovers lay!
“ There, there*’ the god, impassion’d, said,
“ Soon as the twilight tinge is fled,
“ And the dim orb of lunar souls6
“ Along its shadowy path-way rolls—
“ There shall we find our bridal bed,
“ And ne’er did rosy rapture spread,
ce Not even in Jove’s voluptuous bowers,
“ A bridal bed so blest as ours!
“ Tell the imperial God, who reigns,
“ Sublime in oriental fanes,
(t Whose towering turrets paint their pride
“ Upon Euphrates’ pregnant tide7;
6	See a preceding note, page 138. It should seem that lunar spirits were of
a purer order than spirits in general, as Pythagoras was said by his followers to
have descended from the regions of the moon. The heresiarch Manes too
imagined that the sun and moon are the residence of Christ, and that the
ascension was nothing more than his flight to those orbs.
7 The temple of Jupiter Belus at Babylon, which consisted of several chapels
and towers. “ In the last tower (says Herodotus) is a large chapel, in which
there lies a bed, very splendidly ornamented, and beside it a table of gold; but
there is no statue in the place. No man is allowed to sleep here, but the
apartment is appropriated to a female, whom, if we believe the Chaldsean
" Tell him, when to his midnight loves
“ In mystic majesty he moves,
“ Lighted by many an odorous fire,
“ And hymn'd by all Chaldaea’s choir—
priests, the deity selects from the women of the country, as his favourite.”
Lib. i. Cap. 181.
The poem now before the reader, and a few more in the present collection,
are taken from a work, which I rather prematurely announced to the public,
and which, perhaps very luckily for myself, was interrupted by my voyage to
America. The following fragments from the same work describe the effect of
one of these invitations of Apollo upon the mind of a young enthusiastic girl.
*	Delphi heard her shrine proclaim,
In oracles, the guilty flame.
Apollo lov’d my youthful charms,
Apollo woo’d me to his arms!—
Sure, sure when man so oft allows
Religion’s wreath to blind his brows,
Weak wondering woman must believe,
Where pride and zeal at once deceive,
When flattery takes a holy vest,
Oh! ’tis too much for woman’s breast!
How often ere the destin’d time,
Which was to seal my joys sublime,
How often did I trembling run
To meet, at morn, the mounting sun,
And, while his fervid beam he threw
Upon my lip's luxuriant dew,
I thought—alas! the simple dream—
There bum’d a kiss in every beam;
With parted lips inhal’d their heat,
And sigh’d “ oh god! thy kiss is sweet!**
“ Oh ! tell the godhead to confess,
“ The pompous joy delights him less,
“ (Even though his mighty arms enfold
“ A priestess on a couch of gold)
Oft too, at day’s meridian hour,
When to the naiad's glearay bower
Our virgins steal, and, blushing, hide
Their beauties in the folding tide,
If, through the grove, whose modest arms
Were spread around my robeless charms,
A wandering sunbeam wanton fell
Where lovers’ looks alone should dwell,
Not all a lover’s looks of flame
Could kindle such an amorous shame,
It was the sun’s admiring glance,
And, as I felt its glow advance
O’er my young beauties, wildly flush’d
I burn’d and panted, thrill’d and blush’d!
*****
No deity at midnight came,
The lamps, that witness’d all my shame,
Reveal’d to these bewilder’d eyes
No other shape than earth supplies;
No solar light, no nectar’d air,
All, all, alas! was human there,
Woman’s faint conflict, virtue’s fall
And passion’s victory, human all!
How gently must the guilt of love
Be charm’d away by Powers above,
When men possess such tender skill
In softening crime and sweetening ill!
’Twas but a night, and morning’s rays
Saw me, with fond, forgiving gaze,
Hang o’er the quiet slumbering breast
Of him who ruin’d all my rest;
Him, who had taught these eyes to weep
Their first sad tears, and yet could sleep!
******
“ Than, when in love's unholier prank,
“ By moonlight cave or rustic bank
u Upon his neck some wood-nymph lies,
f( Exhaling from her lip and eyes
“ The flame and incense of delight,
i( To sanctify a dearer rite,
“ A mystery, more divinely warm'd
(( Than priesthood ever yet perform'd!'*
Happy the maid, whom heaven allows
To break for heaven her virgin vows!
Happy the maid !—her robe of shame
Is whiten’d by a heavenly flame,
Whose glory, with a lingering trace,
Shines through and deifies her race !
Oh virgin ! what a doom is thine !
To-night, to-night a lip divine5
*	Fontenelle, in his playful rifacimento of the learned materials of Van-Dale,
has related in his own inimitable manner an adventure of this kind which was
detected and exposed at Alexandria. See L’Histoire des Oracles, seconde
dissertat, chap. vii. Crebillon too, in one of his most amusing little stories,
has made the Genie Mange-Taupes, of the Isle Jonquille, assert this privilege of
In every kiss shall stamp on thee
A seal of immortality!
Fly to the cave, Aphelia, fly;
There lose the world and wed the sky!
There all the boundless rapture steal
Which gods can give or woman feel!
spiritual beings in a manner very formidable to the husbands of the island.
He says however, “ Les maris ont le plaisir de rester toujours dans le doute;
en pareil cas, c'est une ressource.”
WOMAN.
Away, away—you’re all the same,
A fluttering, smiling, jilting throng!
Oh! by my soul, I burn with shame,
To think I’ve been your slave so long!
Slow to be warm’d and quick to rove,
From folly kind, from cunning loath,
Too cold for bliss, too weak for love,
Yet feigning all that’s best in both.
Still panting o’er a crowd to reign,
More joy it gives to woman’s breast,
To make ten frigid coxcombs vain,
Than one true, manly lover blest!
Away, away—your smile’s a curse—
Oh ! blot me from the race of men,
Kind pitying heaven ! by death or worse,
Before I love such things again !
BALLAD STANZAS.
I knew by the smoke, that so gracefully curl’d
Above the green elms, that a cottage was near,
And I said, “ If there’s peace to be found in the world,
“ A heart that was humble might hope for it here Γ*
It was noon, and on flowers that languish’d around
In silence repos’d the voluptuous bee;
Every leaf was at rest, and I heard not a sound
But the wood-pecker tapping the hollow beech-tree.
And “ Here in this lone little wood,” I exclaim’d,
“ With a maid who was lovely to soul and to eye, .
Who would blush when I prais’d her, and weep when I
blam’d,
“ How blest could I live, and how calm could I die !
u By the shade of yon sumach, whose red berry dips
“ In the gush of the fountain, how sweet to recline,
" And to know that I sigh’d upon innocent lips,
“ Which had never been sigh'd on by any but mine!”
TO
ϋΟΣΕΙ ΤΑ «ΛΤΑΤΑ*
Euripides.
SBBOB&SSSB
1803.
Come, take the harp—'tis vain to muse
Upon the gathering ills we see;
Oh! take the harp and let me lose
All thoughts of ill in hearing thee!
Sing to me, love !—though death were near,
Thy song could make my soul forget—
Nay, nay, in pity, dry that tear,
All may be well, be happy yet!
Let me but see that snowy arm
Once more upon the dear harp lie,
And I will cease to dream of harm,
. Will smile at fate, while thou art nigh !
Give me that strain, of mournful touch,
We us’d to love long, long ago,
Before our hearts had known as much
As now, alas! they bleed to know!
Sweet notes! they tell of former peace,
Of all, that look’d so rapturous then,
Now wither’d, lost—oh ! pray thee, cease,
I cannot bear those sounds again!
Art thou too wretched ? yes, thou art;
I see thy tears flow fast with mine—
Come, come to this devoted heart,
’Tis breaking, but it still is thine!
A
VISION OF PHILOSOPHY.
’Twas on the Red Sea coast, at morn, we met
The venerable man1; a virgin bloom
Of softness mingled with the vigorous thought
That tower’d upon his brow; as when we see
The gentle moon and the full radiant sun
Shining in heaven together. When he spoke
*Twas language sweeten’d into song—such holy sounds
1	In Plutarch’s Essay on the Decline of the Oracles, Cleombrotus, one of
the interlocutors, describes an extraordinary man whom he had met with,
after long research, upon the banks of the Red Sea. Once in every year this
supernatural personage appeared to mortals, and conversed with them j the
rest of his time he passed among the Genii and the Nymphs. ΥΙψ τψ ΐξυΒξαν
Βαλασταν Ιυξον, ανΒξωποις avoc % αν έτος άτταζ νηυγχανοντα, ταλλα Ss <τυν τ αις
yvpψαις, νο[/Μ<τι και δχιμ.ο<η, ως εφοκηιε. He spoke in a tone not far removed
from singing, and whenever he opened his lips, a fragrance fdled the place:
ψΒιγίοιχ.εvH Ss τον τοπον ευωδια κατείχε, τα το[ΐατος rtδ/τον αποπνεοντος. From him
Cleombrotus learned the doctrine of a plurality of worlds.
As oft the spirit of the good man hears,
Prelusive to the harmony of heaven,
When death is nigh2! and still, as he unclos’d
His sacred lips, an odour, all as bland
As ocean-breezes gather from the flowers
That blossom in elysium3, breath’d around !
With silent awe we listen’d, while he told
Of the dark veil, which many an age had hung
O’er nature’s form, till by the touch of time
The mystic shroud grew thin and luminous,
And half the goddess beam’d in glimpses through it!
Of magic wonders, that were known and taught
By him (or Cham or Zoroaster named)
Who mus’d,1 amid the mighty cataclysm,
O’er his rude tablets of primeval lore4,
8 The celebrated Janus Dousa, a little before his death, imagined that he
heard a strain of music in the air. See the poem of Heinsius “ In harmoniam
quam paulo ante obitum audire sibi visus est Dousa.” Pag. 501.
3	1	 ivSoe IΙ/ΜΧ.'Χξων
vccrov ωκεανώες
eevgai π£ξΐπν$8<τιν: av-
Bsjjioc χξυ<τϋ φλεγει, Pindar. Olymp. ii.
4	Cham, the son of Noah, is supposed to have taken with him into the
ark the principal doctrines of magical, or rather of natural, science, which he
Nor let the living star of science5 sink
Beneath the waters, which ingulph’d the world !—
Of visions, by Calliope reveal’d
To him6, who trac’d upon his typic lyre
had inscribed upon some very durable substances, in order that they might
resist the ravages of the deluge, and transmit the secrets of antediluvian
knowledge to his posterity. See the extracts made by Bayle, in his article
Cham. The identity of Cham and Zoroaster depends upon the authority of
Berosus, or the impostor Annius, and a few more such respectable authorities.
See Naude’s Apologie pour les Grands Hommes, &c. Chap. 8, where he takes
more trouble than is necessary in refuting this gratuitous supposition.
5	Chamum a posteris hujus artis admiratoribus Zoroastrum, seu vivum
astrum, propterea fuisse dictum et pro Deo habitum. Bochart. Geograph.
Sacr. Lib. iv. Cap. 1.
e Orpheus.—Paulinus, in his Hebdomades, Cap. 2. Lib. iii. has endea-
voured to shew, after the Platonists, that man is a diapason, made up of a
diatesseron, which is his soul, and a diapente, which is his body. Those
frequent allusions to music, by which the ancient philosophers illustrated
their sublime theories, must have tended very much to elevate the charac-
ter of the art, and to enrich it with associations of the grandest and most
interesting nature. See a preceding note, p. 48, for their ideas upon the
harmony of the spheres. Heraclitus compared the mixture of good and evil
in this world to the blended varieties of harmony in a musical instrument j
(Plutarch, de Animae Procreat.) and Euryphamus, the Pythagorean, in a
fragment preserved by Stobaeus, describes human life, in its perfection, as a
sweet and well-tuned lyre. Some of the ancients were so fanciful as to sup-
pose that the operations of the memory were regulated by a kind of musical
cadence, and that ideas occurred to it “ per arsin et thesin j” while others con-
verted the whole man into a mere harmonized machine, whose motion
The diapason of man’s mingled frame,
And the grand Doric heptachord of heaven!
With all of pure, of wondrous and arcane,
Which the grave sons of Mochus, many a night,
Told to the young and bright-hair’d visitant
Of Carmel’s sacred mount7!—Then, in a flow
depended upon a certain tension of the body, analogous to that of the strings
in an instrument. Cicero indeed ridicules Aristoxenus for this fancy, and
says, “ let him teach singing, and leave philosophy to Aristotlebut Aristotle
himself, though decidedly opposed to the harmonic speculations of the
Pythagoreans and Platonists, could sometimes condescend to enliven his doc-
trines by reference to the beauties of musical science j as, in the treatise Π«ρ<
M<rfia attributed to him, ΚαΒαπεξ Js εν χοξω> κοξυφαιϋ καταξζαντος. κ. τ. λ.
The Abbe Batteux, upon the doctrine of the Stoics, attributes to those philo-
sophers the same mode of illustration. “ L’ame etoit cause active ttoiuv αίτιος;
le corps cause passive τα πασ-χεη. L’une agissant dans l’autre; et y
prenant, par son action meme, un caractere, des formes, des modifications,
qu’elle n’avoit pas par elle-m£me; a peu pres comme l'air, qui chasse dans un
instrument de musique, fait connditre par les differens sons qu’il produit, les
differentes modifications qu’il y re9oit.” See a fine simile of this kind in
Cardinal Polignac’s poem, Lib. 5. v. 734.
7	Pythagoras is represented in Jamblichus as descending with great solem-
nity from Mount Carmel, for which reason the Carmelites have claimed him
as one of their fraternity. This Mochus or Moschus, with the descendants of
whom Pythagoras conversed in Phoenicia, and from whom he derived the doc-
trines of atomic philosophy, is supposed by some to be the same with Moses.
Huett has adopted this idea, Demonstration £vangelique, Prop. iv. Chap. 2. § 7»
and Le Clerc, amongst others, has refuted it. See Biblioth. Choisie, Tom. i.
p. 75. It is certain however that the doctrine of atoms was known and pro-
Of calmer converse, he beguil’d us on
Through many a maze of garden and of porch,
mulgated long before Epicurus. “ With the fountains of Democritus,” says
Cicero ** the gardens of Epicurus were watered j” and indeed the learned
author of the Intellectual System has shewn, that all the early philosophers,
till the time of Plato, were atomists. AVe find Epicurus, however, boasting
that his tenets were new and unborrowed, and perhaps few among the antients
had a stronger claim to originality j for, in truth, if we examine their schools
of philosophy, notwithstanding the peculiarities which seem to distinguish
them from each other, we may generally observe that the difference is but
verbal and trifling, and that, among those various and learned heresies,
there is scarcely one to be selected, whose opinions are its own, original and
exclusive. The doctrine of the world’s eternity may be traced through all the
sects. The continual metempsychosis of Pythagoras, the grand periodic year of
theStoics, (at the conclusion of which the universe is supposed to return to its ori-
ginal order, and commence a new revolution), the successive dissolution and com-
bination of atoms maintained by the Epicureans, all these tenets are but
different intimations of the same general belief in the eternity of the world.
As St. Austin explains the periodic year of the Stoics, it disagrees only so far
with the idea of the Py thagoreans, that instead of an endless transmission of the
soul through a variety of bodies, it restores the same body and soul to
repeat their former round of existence, and ** that identical Plato, who lec-
tured in the Academy of Athens, shall again and again, at certain intervals
during the lapse of eternity, appear in the same Academy and resume the same
functions—” —sic eadem tempora temporaliumque rerum volumina repeti,
ut v. g. sicut in isto seculo Plato philosophus in urbe Atheniensi, in eh schol4
quae Academia dicta est, discipulos docuit, ita per innumerabilia retro saecula,
multum plexis quidem intervallis, sed certis, et idem Plato, et eadem civitas,
eademque schola, iidemque discipuli repetiti et per innumerabilia deinde
saecula repetendi sint—de Civitat. Dei, Lib. xii. Cap. 13. Vanini, in his dia-
logues, has given us a similar explication of the periodic revolutions of the world.
Through many a system, where the scatter’d light
Of heavenly truth lay, like a broken beam
“ Ea de caus&, qui nunc sunt in usu ritus, centies millies fuerunt, totiesque
renascentur quoties ceciderunt.” 52.
The paradoxical notions of the Stoics, upon the beauty, the riches, the do-
minion of their imaginary sage, are among the most distinguishing character-
istics of the school, and, according to their advocate Lipsius, were peculiar to
that sect. “ Priora illa (decreta) quae passim in philosophantium scholis ferd
obtinent, ista quae peculiaria huic sectae et habent contradictionem: i. e. pa-
radoxa.” Manuduct. ad Stoic. Philos. Lib. iii. Dissertat. 2. But it is evident
(as the Abbe Gamier has remarked, Memoires de l’Acad. Tom. 35.) that even
these absurdities of the Stoics are borrowed, and that Plato is the source of all
their extravagant paradoxes. We find their dogma, “ dives qui sapiens,”
(which Clement of Alexandria has transferred from the philosopher to the
Christian, Paedagog. Lib. iii. cap. 6.) expressed in the prayer of Socrates at
the end of the Phaedrus. Ω. φίλε Παν τ£ και άλλοι o<roi τν$ε Βεοι, ΰοιητε μοι καλια
γενεο-Βαι ravioSeV' ταξωΒεν 3ε όσα ί%«, τοις εντος είναι μοι φιλία. πλΗσιον
νομιζοιμι τον <τοφον. And many other instances might be adduced from the
Amξαςαι, the ΤΙολπιχος, &c. to prove that these weeds of paradox were gathered
among the bowers of the Academy. Hence it is that Cicero, in the preface to
his Paradoxes, calls them Socratica; and Lipsius, exulting in the patronage of
Socrates, says ** Ille totus est noster.” This is indeed a coalition, which
evinces as much as can be wished the confused similitude of antient philoso-
phical opinions: the father of scepticism is here enrolled amongst the founders
of the Portico; he, whose best knowledge was that of his own ignorance, is
called in to authorize the pretensions of the most obstinate dogmatists in all
antiquity.
Rutilius, in his Itinerarium, has ridiculed the sabbath of the Jews, as
“ lassati mollis imago Dei;” but Epicurus gave an eternal holiday to his gods,
and, rather than disturb the slumbers of Olympus, denied at once the interfe-
rence of a Providence. He does not, however, seem to have been singular ia
From the pure sun, which, though refracted all
Into a thousand hues, is sunshine still8,
this opinion. Theophilus of Antioch, if he deserve any credit, in a letter to
Autolycus, Lib. iii. imputes a similar belief to Pythagoras. φη<η (ΠυΒαγοξας')
τε των πάντων Βεϋς ανΒξωπων μηδέν φξοντιζέιν. and Plutarch, though so hostile to
the followers of Epicurus, has unaccountably adopted the very same theologi-
cal error; having quoted the opinions of Anaxagoras and Plato upon divinity,
he adds Κοινώς Hv α[Μΐξτανν<ην αμφοτεξοι, ότι τον Βεον εποιηναν επιτεφομενον των
ανΒζωπινων. De Placit. Philosoph. Lib. i. Cap. 7- Plato himself has attributed
a degree of indifference to the gods, which is not far removed from the apathy
of Epicurus’s heaven; as thus, in his Philebus, where Protarchus asks, Ovtchv
εικος γε ατε %αΐξειν Βεχς, ϋτε το ενάντιον; and Socrates answers, ΤΙανυ μ,εν ουν εικος,
αο-χημον γουν αυτών εκατεξον γιγνομενον ετιν. while Aristotle supposes a still more
absurd neutrality, and concludes, by no very flattering analogy, that the deity
is as incapable of virtue as of vice. Kat γαξ ωσ-πεξ ονδεν Βηξίου ε<»ι χαχ,ιοι, ουδ' αξετη,
ούτως ουδε Βεου. Ethic. Nicomach. Lib. vii. cap. 1. In truth, Aristotle, upon the
subject of Providence, was little more correct than Epicurus. He supposed the
moon to be the limit of divine interference, excluding of course this sublunary
world from its influence. The first definition of the world, in his treatise
riffi Koo-jitou (if this treatise be really the work of Aristotle) agrees, almost
verbum verbo, with that in the letter of Epicurus to Pythocles; they both
omit the mention of a deity; and, in his Ethics, he intimates a doubt whether
the gods feel any interest in the concerns of mankind. E/ γαξ τις επιτελεία των
ανΒξωπινων ύπο Βεων γίνεται. It is true, he adds Ωτπεξ δοκε/, but even this is
very sceptical.
In these erroneous conceptions of Aristotle, we trace the cause of that
general neglect, which his philosophy experienced among the early Christians.
Plato is seldom much more orthodox, but the obscure enthusiasm of his style
allowed them to interpret all his fancies to their purpose; such glowing steel
was easily moulded, and Platonism became a sword in the hands of the fathers.
The Providence of the Stoics, so vaunted in their school, was a power as con-
And bright through every change !—he spoke of Him,
The lone9, eternal One, who dwells above,
temptibly inefficient as the rest. All was fate in the system of the Portico.
The chains of destiny were thrown over Jupiter himself, and their deity was,
like Borgia, et Caesar et nihil. Not even the language of Seneca can reconcile
this degradation of divinity. ** Hie ipse omnium conditor ac rector scripsit quidam
fata, sed sequitur; semper paret, semel jussit.” Lib. de Providenti^, Cap. 5.
With respect to the difference between the Stoics, Peripatetics, and Academi*
cians, the following words of Cicero prove that he saw but little to distinguish
them from each other. “ Peripateticos et Academicos, nominibus differentes, re
congruentes; a quibus Stoici ipsi verbis magis quam sententiis dissenserunt.”
Academic. Lib. ii. 5. and perhaps what Reid has remarked upon one of their
points of controversy might be applied as effectually to the reconcilement of
all the rest. “ The dispute between the Stoics and Peripatetics was pro-
bably all for want of definition. The one said they were good under the con-
troul of reason, the other that they should be eradicated.” Essays, Vol. iii.
In short, from the little which I know upon the subject, it appears to me as
difficult to establish the boundaries of opinion between any two of the philoso-
phical sects, as it would be to fix the land-marks of those estates in the moon,
which Ricciolus so generously allotted to his brother astronomers. Accord-
ingly we observe some of the greatest men of antiquity passing without scruple
from school to school, according to the fancy or convenience of the moment.
Cicero, the father of Roman philosophy, is sometimes an Academician, some-
times a Stoic j and, more than once, he acknowledges a conformity with
Epicurus; “ non sine causa igitur Epicurus ausus est dicere semper in plu-
ribus bonis esse sapientem, quia semper sit in voluptatibus.” Tusculan.
Qua>st. Lib. v. Though often pure in his theology, he sometimes smiles at
futurity as a fiction; thus, in his Oration for Cluentius, speaking of ( unishments
in the life to come, he says “ Quae si falsa sunt, id quod omnes intelligunt, ruid
ei tandem aliud mors eripuit, praeter sensum doloris?” though here perhaps we
should do him justice by agreeing with his commentator Sylvius, who remarks
And of the soul’s untraceable descent
From that high fount of spirit, through the grades
upon this passage, ** Haec autem dixit, ut causae suae subserviret." Horace
roves like a butterfly through the schools, and now wings along the walls of
the Porch, and now basks among the flowers of the Garden; while Virgil, with
a tone of mind strongly philosophical, has left us uncertain of the sect which
he espoused: the balance of opinion declares him an Epicurean, but the
antient author of his life asserts that he was an Academician, and we trace
through his poetry the tenets of almost all the leading sects. The same kind
of eclectic indifference is observable in most of the Roman writers. Thus
Propertius, in the fine elegy to Cynthia, on his departure for Athens,
Illic vel studiis animum emendare Platonis,
Incipiam, aut hortis, docte Epicure, tuis.
Lib. iii. Eleg. 21.
Though Broukhusius here reads, “ dux Epicure,” which seems to fix the poet
under the banners of Epicurus. Even the Stoic Seneca, whose doctrines have
been considered so orthodox, that St. Jerome has ranked him amongst the eccle-
siastical writers, and Boccaccio, in his commentary upon Dante, has doubted, (in
consideration of the philosopher’s supposed correspondence with St. Paul,) whe-
ther Dante should have placed him in Limbo with the rest of the Pagans—the
rigid Seneca has bestowed such commendations on Epicurus, that if only those
passages of his works were preserved to us, we could not, I think, hesitate in
pronouncing him an Epicurean. In the same manner we find Porphyry, in his
work upon abstinence, referring to Epicurus as an example of the most strict
Pythagorean temperance; and Lancelotti, the author of Farfalloni degli antichi
Istorici, has been seduced by this grave reputation of Epicurus into the absurd
error of associating him with Chrysippus, as a chief of the Stoic school. There
is no doubt, indeed, that however the Epicurean sect might have relaxed from
its original purity, the morals of its founder were as correct as those of any
among the antient philosophers, and his doctrines upon pleasure, as explained
\
Of intellectual being, till it mix
With atoms vague, corruptible and dark;
Nor even then, though sunk in earthly dross,
in the letter to Menoeceus, are rational, amiable, and consistent with our nature.
M. de Sablons, in his Grands Hommes venges, expresses strong indignation
against the Encyclopedistes for their just and animated praises of Epicurus,
and discussing the question, “ si ce philosophe etoit vertueux,” he denies it
upon no other authority than the calumnies collected by Plutarch, who him-
self confesses that, on this particular subject, he consulted only opinion and
report, without pausing to investigate their truth. Αλλα τψ 5ο£αν, ου τψ
ocKtjBstav ο-Μπουμιν. To the factious zeal of his illiberal rivals the Stoics,
Epicurus owed these gross misrepresentations of the life and opinions of him-
self and his associates, which, notwithstanding the learned exertions of Gassendi,
have still left an odium on the name of his philosophy; and we ought to ex-
amine the ancient accounts of Epicurus with the same degree of cautious belief
which, in reading ecclesiastical history, we yield to the declamations of the
fathers against the heretics, trusting as little to Plutarch upon a dogma of this
philosopher, as we would to St. Cyril upon a tenet of Nestorius. (1801.)
The preceding remarks, I wish the reader to observe, were written at a time,
when I thought the studies to which they refer much more important and much
more amusing than, I freely confess, they appear to me at present.
8 Lactantius asserts that all the truths of Christianity may be found dis-
persed through the ancient philosophical sects, and that any one who would
collect these scattered fragments of orthodoxy, might form a code in no
respect differing from that of the Christian. ** Si extitisset aliquis, qui veri-
tatem sparsam per singulos per sectasque diffusam colligeret in unum, ac
redigeret in corpus, is profecto non dissentiret a nobis.” Inst. Lib. vi. c. 7.
*	To fAOVOV και £ ξηρόν,.
Corrupted all, nor its ethereal touch
Quite lost, but tasting of the fountain still!
As some bright river, which has roll'd along
Through meads of flowery light and mines of gold,
When pour’d at length into the dusky deep,
Disdains to mingle with its briny taint,
But keeps awhile the pure and golden tinge,
The balmy freshness of the fields it left10!
And here the old man ceased—a winged train
Of nymphs and genii led him from our eyes.
The fair illusion fled! and, as I wak'd,
I	knew my visionary soul had been
Among that people of aerial Dreams
Who live upon the burning galaxy11!
10 This fine Platonic image I have taken from a passage in Father Bouchet’s
letter upon the Metempsychosis, inserted in Picart’s Cerem. Relig. Tom. IV.
II	According to Pythagoras, the people of Dreams are souls collected toge-
ther in the Galaxy. Λημος 8ε ονεΐξων9 κατα ΤΙυΒαγοξαν9 at φι%αι ας <τνναγε<Γ$αι
<Ρη<ην εις τον γαλαξίαν. Porphyr. de Antro Nymph.
TO
The world had just begun to steal
£ach hope, that led me lightly on,
I felt not, as I us’d to feel,
And life grew dark and love was gone!
No eye to mingle sorrow’s tear,
No lip to mingle pleasure’s breath,
No tongue to call me kind and dear—
’Twas gloomy, and I wish’d for death!
But when I saw that gentle eye,
Oh ! something seem’d to tell me then,
That I was yet too young to die,
And hope and bliss might bloom again!
With every beamy smile, that crost
Your kindling cheek, you lighted home
Some feeling, which my heart had lost,
And peace, which long had learn’d to roam!
'Twas then indeed so sweet to live,
Hope look'd so new and love so kind,
That, though I weep, I still forgive
The ruin, which they've left behind!
I could have lov'd you—oh so well!—
The dream, that wishing boy-hood knows,
Is but a bright, beguiling spell,
Which only lives, while passion glows:
But, when this early flush declines,
When the heart's vivid morning fleets,
You know not then how close it twines
Round the first kindred soul it meets !
Yes, yes, I could have lov'd, as one
Who, while his youth’s enchantments fall,
Finds something dear to rest upon,
Which pays him for the loss of all!
*	* * *
*	% *
DREAMS.
TO
In slumber, I prithee how is it
That souls are oft taking the air,
And paying each other a visit,
While bodies are—Heaven knows where ?
Last night, ’tis in vain to deny it,
Your Soul took a fancy to roam,
For I heard her, on tiptoe so quiet,
Come ask, whether mine was at home.
And mine let her in with delight,
And they talk’d and they kist the time through,
For, when souls come together at night,
There is no knowing what they mayn’t do!
And your little Soul, Heaven bless her!
Had much to complain and to say,
Of how sadly you wrong and oppress her
By keeping her prison'd all day.
“ If I happen,” said she, “ but to steal
“ For a peep now and then to her eye,
“ Or, to quiet the fever I feel,
“ Just venture abroad on a si gh;
“ In an instant, she frightens me in
(e With some phantom of prudence or terror*
“ For fear I should stray into sin,
“ Or, what is still worse, into error!
“ So, instead of displaying my graces
“ Through look and through words and through
mien,
“ I am shut up in corners and places,
“ Where truly I blush to be seen !'*
Upon hearing this piteous confession,
My Soul, looking tenderly at her,
Declar'd, as for grace and discretion,
He did not know much of the matter;
S
“ But, to-morrow, sweet Spirit!” he said,
“ Be at home after midnight, and then
“ I will come when your lady’s in bed,
“ And we’ll talk o’er the subject again.”
So she whisper’d a word in his ear,
I suppose to her door to direct him,
And—just after midnight, my dear,
Your polite little Soul may expect him.
A
CANADIAN BOAT-SONG.
WRITTEN ON
THE RIVER ST. LAWRENCE'.
ET REMIGEM CANTUS HORTATUR.
Quintilian*
Faintly as tolls the evening chime,
Our voices keep tune and our oars keep time.
1 I wrote these words to an air, which our boat-men sung to us very fre-
quently. The wind was so unfavourable, that they were obliged to row all
the way, and we were five days in descending the river from Kingston to
Montreal, exposed to an intense sun during the day, and at night forced to
take shelter from the dews in any miserable hut upon the banks that would
receive us. But the magnificent scencry of the St. Lawrence repays all these
difficulties.
Our Voyageurs had good voices, and sung perfectly in tune together. The
original words of the air, to which I adapted these stanzas, appeared to be a
long, incoherent story, of which I could understand but little, from the barba-
rous pronunciation of the Canadians. It begins
Dans mon chemin j’ai rencontre
Deux cavaliers tres bien montes;
Soon as the woods on shore look dim,
We’ll sing at St. Ann’s our parting hymn*.
Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
The rapids are near and the day-light's past!
And the refrain to every verse was
A l’ombre d’un bois je m’en vais jouer,
A l’ombre d’un bois je m’en vais danser.
I ventured	to	harmonize this air, and have published	it.	Without	that
charm, which	association gives to every little memorial of scenes	or	feelings
that are past, the melody may perhaps be thought common and trifling; but
I remember when we have entered, at sunset, upon one of those beautiful
lakes, into which the St. Lawrence so grandly and unexpectedly opens, I have
heard this simple air with a pleasure which the finest compositions of the first
masters have never given me, and now, there is not a note of it, which does not
recal to my memory the dip of our oars in the St. Lawrence, the flight of our
boat down the Rapids, and all those new and fanciful impressions to which
my heart was alive during the whole of this very interesting voyage.
The above stanzas are supposed to be sung by those voyageurs, who go to
the Grande Portage by the Utawas River. For an account of this wonderful
undertaking see Sir Alexander Mackenzie’s General History of the Fur Trade,
prefixed to his Journal.
8	** At the Rapid of St. Ann they are obliged to take out part, if not the
whole, of their lading. It is from this spot the Canadians consider they take
their departure, as it possesses the last church on the island, which is dedicated
to the tutelar saint of voyagers.” Mackenzie, General History of the Fur
Trade.
Why should we yet our sail unfurl?
There is not a breath the blue wave to curl!
But, when the wind blows off the shore,
Oh! sweetly we'll rest our weary oar.
Blow, breezes, blow, the stream runs fast,
The rapids are near and the day-light’s past!
Utawas tide ! this trembling moon
Shall see us float over thy surges soon.
Saint of this green isle ! hear our prayers,
Oh ! grant us cool heavens and favoring airs.
Blow, breezes, blow, the stream runs fast,
The rapids are near and the day-light’s past!
/
EPISTLE IX.
TO THE
LADY CHARLOTTE R-------WD----N.
FROM THE BANKS OF THE ST. LAWRENCE.
Not many months have now been dream’d away
Since yonder sun, (beneath whose evening ray
We rest our boat among these Indian isles,)
Saw me, where mazy Trent serenely smiles
Through many an oak, as sacred as the groves,
Beneath whose shade the pious Persian roves,
And hears the soul of father, or of chief,
Or loved mistress, sigh in every leaf1!
There listening, Lady! while thy lip hath sung
My own unpolish'd lays, how proud I've hung
1	Avendo essi per costume di avere in veneratione gli alberi grandi & anti-
chi, quasi che siano spesso ricettacoli di anime beate. Pietro della Valle,
Part. Second. Lettera 16 da i giardini di Sciraz.
On every mellow’d number! proud to feel
That notes like mine should have the fate to steal,
As o’er thy hallowing lip they sigh’d along,
Such breath of passion and such soul of song.
Oh ! I have wonder’d, like the peasant boy
Who sings at eve his sabbath strains of joy,
And when he hears the rude, luxuriant note
Back to his ear on softening echoes float,
Believes it still some answering spirit’s tone,
And thinks it all too sweet to be his own!
I dream’d not then that, ere the rolling year
Had fill’d its circle, I should wander here
In musing awe; should tread this wondrous world,
See all its store of inland waters hurl’d
In one vast volume down Niagara’s steep2,
Or calm behold them, in transparent sleep,
*	When I arrived at Chippewa, within three miles of the Falls, it was too
late to think of visiting them that evening, and I lay awake all night with the
sound of the cataract in my ears. The day following I consider as a kind of
era in my life, and the first glimpse which I caught of those wonderful Falls
gave me a feeling which nothing in this world can ever excite again.
To Colonel Brock, of the 49th, who commanded at the Fort, I am particu-
larly indebted for his kindness to me during the fortnight I remained at
Niagara. Among many pleasant days, which I passed with him and his
brother-officers, that of our visit to the Tuscarora Indians was not the least
Where the blue hills of old Toronto shed
Their evening shadows o’er Ontario’s bed!—
Should trace the grand Cadaraqui, and glide
Down the white rapids of his lordly tide
Through massy woods, through islets flowering fair,
Through shades of bloom, where the first sinful pair
For consolation might have weeping trod,
When banish’d from the garden of their God!
Oh, Lady! these are miracles, which man,
Cag’d in the bounds of Europe’s pigmy plan,
Can scarcely dream of; which his eye must see
To know how beautiful this world can be!
But soft!—the tinges of the west decline,
And night falls dewy o’er these banks of pine.
Among the reeds, in which our idle boat
Is rock’d to rest, the wind’s complaining note
Dies, like a half-breath’d whispering of flutes;
Along the wave the gleaming porpoise shoots,
interesting. They received us in all their ancient costume j the young men
exhibited for our amusement, in the race, the bat-game, &c. while the old and
the women sat in groups under the surrounding trees, and the picture altoge-
ther was as beautiful as it was new to me.
And I can trace him, like a watery star3,
Down the steep current, till he fades afar
Amid the foaming breakers’ silvery light,
Where yon rough rapids sparkle through the night!
Here, as along this shadowy bank I stray,
And the smooth glass-snake4, gliding o’er my way,
Shews the dim moonlight through his scaly form,
Fancy, with all the scene's enchantment warm,
Hears in the murmur of the nightly breeze,
Some Indian Spirit warble words like these :
From the clime of sacred doves5,
Where the blessed Indian roves
Through the air on wing, as white
As the spirit-stones of light6,
3	Anburey, in his Travels, has noticed this shooting illumination which the
porpoises diffuse at night through the St. Lawrence. Vol. i. p. 29.
4	The glass-snake is brittle and transparent.
s ** The departed spirit goes into the Country of Souls, where, according to
some, it is transformed into a dove.” Charlevoix, upon the Traditions and the
Religion of the Savages of Canada. See the curious fable of the American
Orpheus in Lafitau, Tom. i. p. 402.
•	“ The mountains appeared to be sprinkled with white stones, which
Which the eye of morning counts
On the Apallachian mounts !
Hither oft my flight I take
Over Huron’s lucid lake,
Where the wave, as clear as dew,
Sleeps beneath the light canoe,
Which, reflected, floating there,
Looks, as if it hung in air7!
Then, when I have stray’d awhile
Through the Manataulin isle8,
Breathing all its holy bloom,
Swift upon the purple plume
glistened in the sun, and were called by the Indians manetoe aseniah, or spirit-
stones.” Mackenzie's Journal.
7 I was thinking here of what Carver says so beautifully in his description of
one of these lakes. f* When it was calm, and the sun shone bright, I could
sit in my canoe, where the depth was upwards of six fathoms, and plainly see
huge piles of stone at the bottom, of different shapes, some of which appeared
as if they had been hewn; the water was at this time as pure and transparent
as air, and my canoe seemed as if it hung suspended in that element. It was
impossible to look attentively through this limpid medium, at the rocks below,
without finding, before many minutes were elapsed, your head swim and your
eyes no longer able to behold the dazzling scene.”
9	Apr£s avoir traverse plusieurs isles peu considerables, nous en trouvames
lc quatrieme jour une fameuse nommee l’lsle de Manitoualin. Voyages du
Baron de Lahontan, Tom. i. Lett. 15. Manataulin signifies a Place of Spi-
rit», and this island in Lake Huron is held sacred by the Indians.
Of my Wakon-Bird9 I fly
Where, beneath a burning sky,
O’er the bed of Erie’s lake
Slumbers many a water-snake,
Basking in the web of leaves,
Which the weeping lily weaves10!
Then I chase the flowret-king
Through his bloomy wild of spring;
See him now, while diamond hues
Soft his neck and wings suffuse,
In the leafy chalice sink,
Thirsting for his balmy drink;
Now behold him, all on fire,
Lovely in his looks of ire,
Breaking every infant stem,
Scattering every velvet gem,
*	“ The Wakon-Bird, which probably is of the same species with the bird
of Paradise, receives its name from the ideas the Indians have of its superior
excellence; the Wakon-Bird being, in their language, the Bird of the Great
Spirit.” Morse.
10	«* The islands of Lake Erie are surrounded to a considerable distance by
the large pond-lily, whose leaves spread thickly over the surface of the lake, and
form a kind of bed for the water-snakes in summer.
Where his little tyrant lip
Had not found enough to sip!
Then my playful hand I steep
Where the gold-thread 11 loves to creep,
Cull from thence a tangled wreath,
Words of magic round it breathe,
And the sunny chaplet spread
O’er the sleeping fly-bird’s head12,
Till, with dreams of honey blest,
Haunted in his downy nest
By the garden’s fairest spells,
Dewy buds and fragrant bells,
Fancy all his soul embowers
In the fly-bird’s heaven of flowers!
Oft, when hoar and silvery flakes
Melt along the ruffled lakes;
11	“ The gold-thread is of the vine-kind, and grows in swamps. The roots
spread themselves just under the surface of the morasses, and are easily drawn
out by handfuls. They resemble a large entangled skein of silk, and are of a
bright yellow.” Morse.
13 L’oiseau mouche, gros comme un hanneton, est de toutes couleurs, vives
et changeantes: il tire sa subsistence des fleurs commes les abeillesj son nid
When the grey moose sheds his horns.
When the track, at evening, warns
Weary hunters of the way
To the wig-wams cheering ray,
Then, aloft through freezing air,
With the snow-bird 13 soft and fair
As the fleece that heaven flings
O'er his little pearly wings,
Light above the rocks I play,
Where Niagara’s starry spray,
Frozen on the cliff, appears
Like a giant’s starting tears !
There, amid the island-sedge,
Just upon the cataract’s edge,
Where the foot of living man
Never trod, since time began,
Lone I sit, at close of day,
While, beneath the golden ray,
est fait d’un cotton tr£s fin suspendu a une branche d’arbre. Voyages aux
Indes Occidentales, par M. Bossu. Second Part. Lett. xx.
° Emberiza hyemalis. See Imlay's Kentucky, page 280.
Icy columns gleam below,
Feather'd round with falling snow,
And an arch of glory springs,
Brilliant as the chain of rings
Round the neck of virgins hung,
Virgins14, who have wander’d young
O’er the waters of the west
To the land, where spirits rest!
Thus have I charm’d, with visionary lay,
The lonely moments of the night away;
And now, fresh day-light o'er the water beams!
Once more, embark’d upon the glittering streams,
Our boat flies light along the leafy shore,
Shooting the falls, without a dip of oar
Or breath of zephyr, like the mystic bark
The poet saw, in dreams divinely dark,
u Lafitau wishes to believe, for the sake of his theory, that there was an
order of vestals established among the Iroquois Indians; but I am afraid th^t
Jaques Carthier, upon whose authority he supports himself, meant any thing
but vestal institutions by the “ cabanes publiques” which he met with at
Montreal. See Lafitau, Moeurs des Sauvages America ins, Me. Tom. i. p. 173.
Borne, without sails, along the dusky flood 15,
While on its deck a pilot angel stood,
And, with his wings of living light unfurl'd,
Coasted the dim shores of another world!
Yet oh! believe me, in this blooming maze
Of lovely nature, where the fancy strays
From charm to charm, where every flowret’s hue
Hath something strange and every leaf is new!
I never feel a bliss so pure and still,
So heavenly calm, as when a stream or hill,
Or veteran oak, like those remember'd well,
Or breeze or echo or some wild-flower’s smell,
(For, who can say what small and fairy ties
The memory flings o’er pleasure, as it flies!)
Reminds my heart of many a sylvan dream
I once indulg’d by Trent’s inspiring stream;
15 Vedi che sdegna gli argomenti umani;
Si che remo non vuol, ne altro velo,
Che Γ ale sue tra liti si lontani.
Vedi come 1’ ha dritte verso Ί cielo
Trattando 1’ aere con 1’ eterne penne;
Che non si mutan, come mortal pelo.
Dante, Purgator. Cant. ii.
Of all my sunny morns and moonlight nights
On Donington’s green lawns and breezy heights!
Whether I trace the tranquil moments o'er,
When I have seen thee cull the blooms of lore,
With him, the polish'd warrior, by thy side,
A sister’s idol and a nation's pride!
When thou hast read of heroes, trophied high
In ancient fame, and I have seen thine eye
Turn to the living hero, while it read,
For pure and brightening comments oil the dead !
Or whether memory to my mind recalls
The festal grandeur of those lordly halls,
When guests have met around the sparkling board,
And welcome warm'd the cup that luxury pour’d;
When the bright future Star of England’s Throne,
With magic smile, hath o'er the banquet shone,
Winning respect, nor claiming what he won,
But tempering greatness, like an evening sun
Whose light the eye can tranquilly admire,
Glorious but mild, all softness yet all fire !—
Whatever hue my recollections take,
Even the regret, the very pain they wake
Is dear and exquisite !—but oh ! no more—
Lady ! adieu—my heart has linger’d o’er
These vanish’d times, till all that round me lies,
Stream, banks and bowers have faded on my eyes !
IMPROMPTU,
AFTER A VISIT TO MRS.-, OF MONTREAL.
’Twas but for a moment—and yet in that time
She crowded th’ impressions of many an hour;
Her eye had a glow, like the sun of her clime,
Which wak’d every feeling at once into flower!
Oh ! could we have stol’n but one rapturous day,
To renew such impressions again and again,
The things we should look and imagine and say
Would be worth all the life we had wasted till then!
What we had not the leisure or language to speak,
We should find some more exquisite mode of revealing,
And, between us, should feel just as much in a week,
Ae others would take a millennium in feeling!
/>
WRITTEN ON PASSING
DEAD-MAN’S ISLAND',
IN TUB
GULF OF ST. LAWRENCE, LATE IN THE EVENING, SEPTEMBER, 1804.
See you, beneath yon cloud so dark,
Fast gliding along, a gloomy Bark I
Her sails are full, though the wind is still,
And there blows not a breath her sails to fill!
1 This is one of the Magdalen Islands, and, singularly enough, is the pro-
perty of Sir Isaac Coffin. The above lines were suggested by a superstition
very common among sailors, who call this ghost-ship, I think, “ the flying
Dutch-inan.”
We were thirteen days on our passage from Quebec to Halifax, and I had
been so spoiled by the very splendid hospitality, with which my friends of the
Phaeton and Boston had treated me, that I was but ill prepared to encounter
the miseries of a Canadian ship. The weather however was pleasant, and
the scenery along the river delightful. Our passage through the Gut of
Canso, with a bright sky and a fair wind, was particularly striking and
romantic.
Oh ! what doth that vessel of darkness bear?
The silent calm of the grave is there,
Save now and again a death-knell rung,
And the flap of the sails, with night-fog hung!
There lieth a wreck on the dismal shore
Of cold and pitiless Labrador;
Where, under the moon, upon mounts of frost,
Full many a mariner’s bones are tost!
Yon shadowy Bark hath been to that wreck,
And the dim blue fire, that lights her deck,
Doth play on as pale and livid a crew,
As ever yet drank the church-yard dew!
To Deadman’s Isle, in the eye of the blast,
To Deadman’s Isle she speeds her fast;
By skeleton shapes her sails are furl'd,
And the hand that steers is not of this world !
Oh! hurry thee on—oh! hurry thee on
Thou terrible Bark! ere the night be gone,
Nor let morning look on so foul a sight
As would blanch for ever her rosy light!
TO
THE BOSTON FRIGATE',
ON
3EAFING HALIFAX FOR ENGLAND,
OCTOBER, 1804.
ΝΟΣΤΟΤ ΠΡΟΦΑΣΙΣ ΓΛΤΚΕΡΟΤ.
Pindar. Pyth. 4.
WiTH triumph this morning, oh Boston ! I hail
The stir of thy deck and the spread of thy sail,
For they tell me I soon shall be wafted, in thee,
To the flourishing isle of the brave and the free,
And that chill Nova-Scotia’s unpromising strand
Is the last I shall tread of American land.
Well—peace to the land! may the people, at length*
Know that freedom is bliss, but that honour is strength;
1 Commanded by Captain J'. E. Douglas, with whom I returned to England,
and to whom I am indebted for many, many kindnesses. In truth, I should
but offend the dclicacy of my friend Douglas, and, at the same time, do injustice
to my own feelings of gratitude, did I attempt to say how much I owe to him.
That though man have the wings of the fetterless wind,
Of the wantonest air that the north can unbind,
Yet if health do not sweeten the blast with her bloom,
Nor virtue’s aroma its pathway perfume,
Unblest is the freedom and dreary the flight,
That but wanders to ruin and wantons to blight!
Farewell to the few I have left with regret,
May they sometimes recall, what I cannot forget,
That communion of heart and that parley of soul,
Which has lengthen’d our nights and illumin’d our bowl,
When they’ve ask’d me the manners, the mind or the mien
Of some bard I had known or some chief I had seen,
Whose glory, though distant, they long had ador’d,
Whose name often hallow’d the juice of their board!
And still as, with sympathy humble but true,
I told them each luminous trait that I knew,
They have listen’d, and sigh’d that the powerful stream
Of America’s empire should pass, like a dream,
Without leaving one fragment of genius, to say
How sublime was the tide which had vanish’d away !
Farewell to the few—though we never may meet
On this planet again, it is soothing and sweet
To think that, whenever my song or my name
Shall recur to their ear, they'll recall me the same
I have been to them now, young, unthoughtful and blest,
Ere hope had deceiv'd me or sorrow deprest!
But, Douglas! while thus I endear to my mind
The elect of the land we shall soon leave behind,
I can read in the weather-wise glance of thine eye,
As it follows the rack flitting over the sky,
That the faint coming breeze will be fair for our flight,
And shall steal us away, ere the falling of night.
Dear Douglas! thou knowest, with thee by my side,
With thy friendship to soothe me, thy courage to guide,
There is not a bleak isle in those suminerless seas,
Where the day comes in darkness or shines but to freeze,
Not a tract of the line, not a barbarous shore,
That I could not with patience, with pleasure explore!
Oh! think then how happy I follow thee now,
When hope smooths the billowy path of our prow,
And each prosperous sigh of the west-springing wind
Takes me nearer the home where my heart is inshrin'd j
Where the smile of a father shall meet me again,
And the tears of a mother turn bliss into pain;
Where the kind voice of sisters shall steal to my heart,
And ask it, in sighs, how we ever could part!—
But see !—the bent top-sails are ready to swell—
To the l)oat—I am with thee—Columbia farewell!
το
LADY Η
ON
AN OLD RING FOUND AT TUNBR1DGE-WELLS.
*	Tunnebrige eet i la ra£me d*-fance de Londres, que Fontainebleau Pest de Paris. Ce qu'il
*	y a de beau et de galant dans Pun et d*ns V autre sexe s’y rassemble au terns des eaux, La
Λ corapagnie, &c.
See Memmrcs de Grammont§ Second. Part. Chap. iii.*
Tunbridge Wells, August, 1805.
w hen Grammont grac’d these happy springs,
And Tunbridge saw, upon her Pantiles,
The merriest wight of all the kings
That ever rul’d these gay, gallant isles;
Like us, by day, they rode, they walk’d,
At eve, they did as we may do,
And Grammont just like Spencer talk’d,
And lovely Stewart smil’d like you !
The oiilv di (Ferent trait is this,
That woman then, if man beset her,
Was rather given to saying “ yes,”
Because, as vet, she knew no better!
7 7
Each night they held a coterie,
Where every fear to slumber charm’d,
Lovers were all they ought to be,
And husbands not the least alarm’d !
They call’d up all their school-day pranks,
Nor thought it much their sense beneath
To play at riddles, quips and cranks,
And lords shew’d wit, and ladies teeth.
As—“ Why are husbands like the Mint?”
Because, forsooth, a husband’s duty
Is just to set the name and print
That give a currency to beauty.
** Why is a garden’s wilder’d maze
“ Like a young widow, fresh and fair?”
Because it wants some hand to raise
The weeds, which “ have no business there!”
And thus they miss'd and thus they hit,
And now they struck and now they parried,
And some lay in of full-grown wit,
While others of a pun miscarried.
’Twas one of those facetious nights'
That Grammont gave this forfeit ring
For breaking grave conundrum rites,
Or punning ill, or—some such thing;
From whence it can be fairly trac’d
Through many a branch and many a bough,
From twig to twig, until it grac'd
The snowy hand that wears it now.
All this I’ll prove, and then—to you
Oh Tunbridge ! and your springs ironical,
I {swear by H—the—te’s eye of blue
To dedicate th' important chronicle.
Long may your ancient inmates give
Their mantles to your modern lodgers,
And Charles’s loves in H—the—te live,
And Charles’s bards revive in Rogers!
Let no pedantic fools be there,
For ever be those fops abolish’d,
With heads as wooden as thy ware,
And, Heaven knows! not half so polish’d.
But still receive the mild, the gay,
The few, who know the rare delight
Of reading Grammont every day,
And acting Grammont every night!
TO
Never mind how the pedagogue proses,
You want not antiquity's stamp,
The lip, that's so scented by roses,
Oh ! never must smell of the lamp.
Old Cloe, whose withering kisses
Have long set the loves at defiance,
Now, done with the science of blisses,
May fly to the blisses of science!
Young Sappho, for want of employments*
Alone o'er her Ovid may melt,
Condemn'd but to read of enjoyments,
Which wiser Corinna had felt.
But for you to be buried in books—
Oh, Fanny ! they're pitiful sages,
Who could not in one of your looks
Read more than in millions of pages!
Astronomy finds in your eye
Better light than she studies above*
And Music must borrow your sigh
As the melody dearest to love.
In Ethics—’tis you that can check,
In a minute, their doubts and their quarrels;
Oh ! shew but that mole on your neck,
And 'twill soon put an end to their morals.
Your Arithmetic only can trip
When to kiss and to count you endeavour;
But Eloquence glows on your lip
When you swear, that you'll love me for ever.
Thus you see, what a brilliant alliance
Of arts is assembled in you—
A course of more exquisite science
Man never need wish to go through!
And, oh !—if a fellow like me
May confer a diploma of hearts,
With my lip thus I seal your degree,
My divine little Mistress of Arts!
EXTRACT1
FROM
“ THE DEVIL AMONG THE SCHOLARS.”
ΤΙ ΚΑΚΟΝ Ό ΓΕΛΩΣ;
Chrysostom. Homil. in Epist. ad Hebraeos.
*	* *
But, whither have these gentle ones,
The rosy nymphs and black-eyed nuns,
With all of Cupid’s wild romancing,
Led my truant brains a dancing ?
Instead of wise encomiastics
Upon the Doctors and Scholastics,
Polymaths and Polyhistors,
Polyglotts and—all their sisters,
The instant I have got the whim in,
Off I fly with nuns and women,
1 The volume has already been so unnecessarily protracted, that I give but
an extract from this Poem» and shall, for the present, suppress the notes.
Like epic poets, ne’er at ease
Until I've stol’n “ in medias res!”
So have I known a hopeful youth
Sit down, in quest of lore and truth,
With tomes, sufficient to confound him,
Like Tohu Bohu, heap’d around him,
Mamurra stuck to Theophrastus,
And Galen tumbling o’er Bombastus!
When lo! while all that’s learn’d and wise
Absorbs the boy, he lifts his eyes,
And through the window of his study
Beholds a virgin fair and ruddy,
With eyes, as brightly turn’d upon him, as
The angel’s were on Hieronymus,
Saying, ’twas just as sweet to kiss her—oh !
Far more sweet than reading Cicero !
Quick fly the folios, widely scatter’d,
Old Homer’s laurell’d brow is batter’d,
And Sappho’s skin to Tully’s leather,
All are confus’d and tost together!
Raptur’d he quits each dozing sage,
Oh woman ! for thy lovelier page :
Sweet book ! unlike the books of art,
Whose errors are thy fairest part;
In whom, the dear errata column
Is the best page in all the volume!
But, to begin my subject rhyme—
’Twas just about this devilish time,
When scarce there happen’d any frolics,
That were not done by Diabolics,
A cold and loveless son of Lucifer,
Who woman scorn'd, nor knew the use of her,
A branch of Dagon's family,
(Which Dagon, whether He or She,
Is a dispute that vastly better is
Referr'd to Scaliger et caeteris,)
Finding that, in this cage of fools,
The wisest sots adorn the schools,
Took it at once his head Satanic in,
To grow a great scholastic mannikin,
A doctor, quite as learn’d and fine as
Scotus John or Tom Aquinas,
Lully, Hales irrefragabilis,
Or any doctor of the rabble is !
In languages, the Polyglotts,
Compar’d to him, were Babel sots;
He chatter’d more than ever Jew did,
Sanhedrim and priest included,
Priest and holy Sanhedrim
Were one-and-seventy fools to him !
But chief the learned daemon felt a
Zeal so strong for gamma, delta,
That, all for Greek and learning’s glory,
He nightly tippled “ Graeco more,’*
And never paid a bill or balance
Except upon the Grecian Kalends,
From whence your scholars, when they want tick,
Say, to be At-tick’s to be on tick!
In logics, he was quite Ho Panu2!
Knew as much as ever man knew.
He fought the combat syllogistic
With so much skill and art eristic,
That though you were the learned Stagyrite,
At once upon the hip he had you right!
Sometimes indeed his speculations
Were view’d as dangerous innovations.
*	Ό ΠΑΝΤ.
As thus—the Doctor s house did harbour a
Sweet blooming girl, whose name was Barbara:
Oft, when his heart was in a merry key,
He taught this maid his esoterica,
And sometimes, as a cure for hectics,
Would lecture her in dialectics.
How far their zeal let him and her go
Before they came to sealing Ergo,
Or how they placed the medius terminus,
Our chronicles do not determine us;
But so it was—by some confusion
In this their logical praelusion,
The Doctor wholly spoil'd, they say,
The figure4 of young Barbara;
And thus, by many a snare sophistic,
And enthymeme paralogistic,
Beguil'd a maid, who could not give,
To save her life, a negative5.
4	The first figure of simple syllogisms, to which Barbara belongs, together
with Celarent, Darii, and Ferio.
5	Because the three propositions in the mood of Barbara are universal
affirmatives.
In music, though he had no ears
Except for that amongst the spheres,
(Which most of all, as he averr’d it,
He dearly lov’d, ’cause no one heard it,)
Yet aptly he, at sight, could read
Each tuneful diagram in Bede,
And find, by Euclid’s corollaria,
The ratios of a jig or aria.
But, as for all your warbling Delias,
Orpheuses and Saint Cecilias,
He own’d he thought them much surpast
By that redoubted Hyaloclastδ,
Who still contriv’d, by dint of throttle,
Where’er he went, to crack a bottle!
Likewise to shew his mighty knowledge, he,
On things unknown in physiology
Wrote many a chapter to divert us,
Like that great little man Albertus,
Wherein he shew’d the reason why,
When children first are heard to cry,
4	Or Glass-Breaker—Morhofius has given an account of this extraordinary
man, in a work published 1682. “ De vitreo scypho fracto, &c.”
If boy the baby chance to be*
He cries O A!—if girl, OE!—
They are, says he, exceeding fair hints
Respecting their first sinful parents;
“ Oh Eve Γ exclaimeth little madam,
While little master cries “ Oh Adam!”
In point of science astronomical,
It seem'd to him extremely comical .
That, once a year, the frolic sun
Should call at Virgo's house for fun,
And stop a month and blaze around her,
Yet leave her Virgo, as he found her!
But, 'twas in Optics and Dioptrics,
Our daemon play'd his first and top tricks,
He held that sunshine passes quicker
Through wine than any other liquor;
That glasses are the best utensils
To catch the eye's bewilder'd pencils;
And though he saw no great objection
To steady light and pure reflection,
He thought the aberrating rays,
Which play about a bumper's blaze,
Were by the Doctors look'd, in common, on,
As a more rare and rich phenomenon!
He wisely said that the sensorium
Is for the eyes a great emporium,
To which these noted picture stealers
Send all they can and meet with dealers.
In many an optical proceeding
The brain, he said, shew'd great good-breeding;
For instance, when we ogle women,
(A trick which Barbara tutor'd him in,)
Although the dears are apt to get in a
Strange position on the retina,
Yet instantly the modest brain
Doth set them on their legs again7!
Our doctor thus with “ stuff'd sufficiency"
Of all omnigenous omnisciency,
Began (as who would not begin
That had, like him, so much within ?)
To let it out in books of all sorts,
Folios, quartos, large and small sorts;
7 Alluding to that habitual act of the judgment, by which, notwithstanding
the inversion of the image upon the retina, a correct impression of the object
is conveyed to the sensorium.
Poems, so rery grave and sensible
That they were quite incomprehensible;
Prose, which had been at learning's Fair,
And bought up all the trumpery there,
The tatter'd rags of every vest,
In which the Greeks and Romans drest,
And o'er her figure swoll’n and antic
Scatter'd them all with airs so frantic,
That those, who saw the fits she had,
Declar'd unhappy Prose was mad!
Ep ics he wrote and scores of rebusses,
All as neat as old Turnebus's;
Eggs and altars, cyclopaedias,
Grammars, prayer books—oh ! ’twere tedious,
Did I but tell the half, to follow me,
Not the scribbling bard of Ptolemy,
No—nor the hoary Trismegistus,
(Whose writings all, thank heaven! have miss’d us,)
E’er fill’d with lumber such a ware-room
As this great “ porcus literarum!”
*	* *
FINIS.
^age 1· Note omitted.—From Captain Cockburn, who commanded this “ Phaeton, that whipp’d me to
the West,” I received such kind attentions as I must ever remember with gratitude.
Page 13, line 5—For gt dry* the tear” read u dries the tear.”
Page 22, last line but one—For “ the hearts” read “ the heart’s.”
Page41, line4—For “ lingering current” read “limpid current” or " silver current,” as the word
w lingering” occurs again in the 7th line.
Page 47—Bead the motto “ Ad harmoniam canere mundum.” Cicero de Natur. Deor. Lib. iii.
Page 63, Note, line 3—For “ the water of Venus” read “ the waters of Venus.”
Page 90, Note 2, line last—For “ is recorded” read " is mentioned.”
Page 107, line 1—For “ her lips reflecting dew” read " her lipfs reflecting dew.”
Page 118· Note omitted—It is often asserted by the transatlantic politicians that this little colony
(Bermuda) deserves more attention from the mother-country than it receives, and it certainly possesses
advantages of situation, to which we should not be long insensible, if it were once in the hands of an
enemy. I was told by a celebrated friend of Washington at New York, that they had formed a plan for
its capture towards the conclusion of the American War; “ with the intention (as he expressed himself)
of making it a nest of hornets for the annoyance of British trade in that part of the world.” And there
is no doubt it lies so (airly in the track to the West-Indies that an enemy might with ease convert it into
a very harassing impediment.
The plan of Bishop Berkely for a college at Bermuda, where American savages might be converted and
educated, though concurred in by the government of the day, was a wild and useless speculation. Mr.
Hamilton, who was governor of the island some years since, proposed, if I mistake not, the establishment
of a marine academy for the instruction of those children of West-Indians, who might be intended for
any nautical employment. This was a more rational idea, and for something of this nature the island is
admirably calculated. But the plan should be much more extensive and embrace a general system of
education; which would entirely remove the alternative, in which the colonists are involved at present, of
either sending their sons to England for instruction, or entrusting them to colleges in the States of Ame-
rica, where ideas by no means favourable to Great Britain, and sometimes indeed hostile to the security
of governments in general, are very sedulously inculcated.
Page 134—Read the motto,
.....................ηχι *e χαλος
Τ1υ$αγϊξ7}ζ, omi re χοξον ατηςιζαν sgurrof.
Page 190, line 2—For “ pouting cheek” read “ pouting check.”
Page 211, lines 3, 4—For
Oh great Potowmac! oh yon banks of shade,
Yon mighty scenes, See.
Read Ob great Potowmac! oh you banks of shade.
You mighty scenes, &c.
Page 267, line last—For
And nothing’s known of luxury but Us vice
Read And nothing’s known of luxury, but vice.
Page 291, Note, line 5—For “ respectable authorities” read “ respectable testimonies.”
Page 323, Note omitted, on the words “ bleak Nova-Scotia’s unpromising strand.”—Sir John Wentworth,
the Governor of Nova-Scotia, very kindly allowed me to accompany him on his visit to the College,
which they have lately established at Windsor, about forty miles from Halifax, and I was indeed most
pleasantly surprised by the beauty and fertility of the country which opened upon us after, the bleak and
rocky wilderness by which Halifax is surrounded.—I was told that, in travelling onwards, we should find
the soil and the scenery improve, and it gave me much pleasure to know that the worthy Governor has
by no means such an " inamabile regnum” as I was, at first sight, inclined to believe.