DEDICATION.
ST----N W-----LR------E, ESQ.
MY DEAR W--------E,
It is now about seven years since I
promised (and I grieve to think it is
almost as long since we met) to dedi-
cate to you the very first Book, of
whatever size or kind, I should publish.
Who could have thought that so many
years would elapse, without my giving
the least signs of life upon the subject
of this important promise? Who could
have imagined that a volume of dog-
gerel, after all, would be the first offer-
ing that Gratitude would lay upon the
shrine of Friendship?
If, however, you are as interested
about me and my pursuits as formerly,
you will be happy to hear that doggerel
is not my only occupation; but that I
am preparing to throw my name to the
Swans of the Temple of Immortality*,
leaving it, of course, to the said Swans
to determine, whether they ever will
take the trouble of picking it from the
stream.
In the mean time, my dear W-------------e,
like a pious Lutheran, you must judge
*	Ariosto, Canto 35.
•	·
VII
of me rather by my faith than my
works, and however trifling the tribute
which I offer, never doubt the fidelity
with which I am, and always shall be, ,
Your sincere and
attached friend,
March 4,1813.
PREFACE.
The Bag, from which the following
Letters are selected, was dropped by a
Twopenny Postman about two months
since, and picked up by an emissary of
the Society for the S—pp—ss—n of
V—e, who, supposing it might mate-
rially assist the private researches of
that Institution, immediately took it to
his employers and was rewarded hand·,
somely for his trouble. Such a trea-
sury of secrets was worth a whole host
of informers; and, accordingly, like the
Cupids of the poet (if I may use so
profane a simile) who “ fell at odds
about the sweet-bag of a bee*,” those
venerable Suppressors almost fought
with each other for the honour and
delight of first ransacking -the Post-Bag.
Unluckily, however, it turned out upon
examination, that the discoveries of
profligacy which it enabled them to
make, lay chiefly in those upper regions
of society, which their well-bred regu-
lations forbid them to molest or meddle
with.—In cousequence, they gained but
very few victims by their prize, and,
after lying for a week or two under Mr.
H—tch—d’s counter, the Bag, with its
violated contents, was sold for a trifle
to a friend of mine.
It happened that I had been just then
seized with an ambition (having never
*	Herrick.
tried the strength of my wing but in a
Newspaper) to publish something or
other in the shape of a Book; and it
occurred to me that, the present being
such a letter-writing era, a few of these
Twopenny Post Epistles, turned into
easy verse, would be as light and popu-
lar a task as I could possibly select for
a commencement I did not think it
prudent, however, to give too many
Letters at first, and, accordingly, have
been obliged (in order to eke out a
sufficient number of pages) to reprint
some ef those trifles, which had already
appeared in the public journals*. As
in the battles of ancient times, the
*	It is but fair to mention that some of these
reprinted jeux-d’esprit (as the Parody on the
R—G—t’s Letter, the Insurrection of the Papers,
the New Costume of the Ministers, and the Sale of
the T09IS) are not mine—but they appeared to be
shades of the departed were sorne<-
times seen among the combatants, so Γ
thought I might remedy die thinness of
my ranks, by conjuring up a few dead
and forgotten ephemerons to fill them.
Such are the motives and accidents,
that led to the present publication; and
as this is the first time my Muse has
ever ventured out of the go-cart of
a Newspaper, though I feel all a
parent’s delight at seeing little Miss go
alone, I am also not without a parent’s
anxiety, lest an unlucky fall should be
the consequence of the experiment;
and I need not point out the many
living instances there are, of Muses that
so perfectly in keeping with my own, and were so
very convenient in filling up my pages, that Ϊ trust
their Author (whoever he may be) will excuse the
liberty I have taken in making use of them·
have suffered severely in their heads,
from taking too early and rashly to
their feet. Besides, a Book is so very
different a thing from a Newspaper!—
in the former, your doggerel, without
either company or shelter, must stand
shivering in the middle of a bleak white
page by itself; whereas, in the latter, it
is comfortably backed by advertise-
ments, and has sometimes even a
Speech of Mr. St—ph—n’s, or some-
thing equally warm, for a chauffe-pie—
so that, in general, the very reverse of
“ laudatur et alget” is its destiny.
Ambition, however, must run some
risks, and I shall be very well satisfied
if the reception of these few Letters,
should have the effect of sending me to
the Post-Bag for more.
INTERCEPTED LETTERS,
fyc.
'	LETTER	I.
FROM THE PR—NC—SS CH------------E OF W-----S
TO THE LADY B—RB—A A—SHL—Y*.
My dear Lady Bab, you'll be shock’d, Fm afraid,
When you hear the sad rumpus your Ponies have
made;
Since the time of horse-consuls (now long out of date,)
No nags ever made such a stir in the State!
*	This young Lady, who is a Roman Catholic, has lately
made a present of some beautiful Ponies to the Pr—nc—ss.'
B
Lord Eld—N first heard —and as instantly pray'd he
To God and his King—that a Popish young Lady
(For though you've bright eyes and twelve thousand
a year,
It is still but too true you’re a Papist, my dear)
Had insidiously sent, by a tall Irish groom,
Two priest-ridden Ponies, just landed from Rome,
And so full, little rogues, of pontifical tricks,
That the dome of St. Paul’s was scarce safe from
their kicks!
Off at once to Papa, in a flurry, he flies—
For Papa always does what these statesmen advise,
On condition that they’ll be, in turn, so polite
As, in no case whatever, to advise him too right—
“ Pretty doings are here, SirH(he angrily cries,
While by dint of dark eyebrows he strives to look wise)
“ Tis a scheme of the Romanists, so help me God!
“ To ride over your most Royal Highness rough-
shod—	'
“ Excuse, Sir, my tears—they're from loyalty’s
source—
“ Bad enough ’twas for Troy to be sack’d by a Horse,
“ But for us to be ruin'd by Ponies still worse!”
Quick a Council is call'd—the whole Cabinet sits—
The Archbishops declare, frighten'd out of their
wits,
That if vile Popish Ponies should eat at my manger,
From that awful moment the Church is in danger!
As, give them but stabling, and shortly no stalls
Will suit their proud stomachs but those at St.
Paul’s.
The Doctor and he, the devout Man of Leather,
V—ns—tt—T, now laying their Saint-heads toge-
ther,
Declare that these skittish young o-bominations
Are clearly foretold in Chap. vi. Revelations—
Nay, they verily think they could point out the
one
Which the Doctor's friend Death was to canter
upon!
Lord H—RR—by, hoping that no one imputes
To the Court any fancy to persecute brutes,
Protests, on the word of himself and his cronies,
That had these said creatures been Asses, not
Ponies,
The Court would have started no sort of objection»
As Asses were, there, always sure of protection.
" If the Pk—nc—ss will keep them, (says Lord
C—STL—B—GH—)
“ To make them quite harmless the only true
way,	>
“ Is (as certain ChiefJustices do with their wives)
“ To flog them within half an inch of their lives—
“ If they've any bad Irish blood lurking about,
“ This (lie knew by experience) would soon draw it
out”
Or—if this be thought cruel—his Lordship proposes
“ The new Veto snaffle to bind down their noses—
“ A pretty contrivance, made out of old chains,
“ Which appears to indulge, while it doubly restrains;
“ Which, however high-mettled, their gamesomeness
cheeks,
(Adds his Lordship humanely) of else breaks their
necks!"
This proposal receiv’d pretty gen’ral applause
From the Statesmen around—and the neck-breaking
clause
Had a vigour about it, which soon reconcil’d
Even Eld—n himself to a measure so mild.
So the snaffles, my dear, were agreed to nem. con.
And my Lord C—stl—B—gh, having so often
shone
In the fettering line, is to buckle them on.
I shall drive to your door in these Vetos some day,
But, at present, adieu!—I must hurry away
To go see my Mamma, as I'm suffer'd to meet her
For just half an hour by the Qu—n’s best repeater.
C--------E.
LETTER II.
„ FROM COLONEL M‘M—Η—N TO G—LD
FR—NC—S L—CKIE, ESQ.
Dear Sir, I've just had time to look
Into your very learned Book*,
Wherein—as plain as man can speak,
Whose English is half modem Greek—
You prove that we can ne'er intrench
Our happy isles against the French,
Till Royalty in England’s made
A much more independent trade—
In short, until the House of Guelph
Lays Lords and Commons on the shelf,
And boldly sets up for itself!
All, that can well be understood
In this said Book, is vastly good;
*	See the last Number of the Edinburgh Review.
And, as to what’s incomprehensible,
I dare be sworn 'tis full as sensible.
But—to your work’s immortal credit—
The P-------e, good Sir, the P------e has read it.
(The only Book, himself remarks,
Which he has read since Mrs. Clarke's)
Last Levee-morn he look’d it through,
During that awful hour or two
Of grave tonsorial preparation,
Which, to a fond, admiring nation,
Sends forth, announc’d by trump and drum,
The best-wigg’d P—r-e in Christendom!
He thinks with you, th’ imagination
Of partnership in legislation
Could only enter in the noddles
Of dull and ledger-keeping twaddles,
Whose heads on firms are running so,
They ev’n must have a King and Co.
And hence, too, eloquently show forth
On checks and balances and so forth.
But now, he trusts, we're coming near a
Better and more royal era;
When England's monarch need but say ‘
“ Whip me those scoundrels, C—stl—r gh!”
Or—“ hang me up those Papists, Eld—n,”
And 'twill be done—aye, faith, and well done.
With view to which, I've his command
To beg, Sir, from your travell’d hand,
(Round which the foreign graces swarm)
A Plan of radical Reform;
Compil'd and chos'n, as best you can,
In Turkey or at Ispahan,
And quite upturning, branch and root,
Lords, Commons, and Burd£tt to boot!
But, pray, whate’er you may impart, write
Somewhat more brief than Major C—rtwr—ght,
Else, though the P--------e be long in rigging,
'Twould take, at least, a fortnight's wigging,____
Two wigs to every paragraph—
Before he well could get through half.
You'll send it also speedily____
As, truth to say, 'twixt you and me,
His Highness, heated by your Work,
Already thinks himself Grand Turk!
And you'd have laugh'd, had you seen how
He scar'd the Ch—nc—ll—B just now,
When (on his Lordship's entering puff'd) he
Slapp’d his back and call'd him “ Mufti !”
The tailors too have got commands,
To put directly into hands
All sorts of Dulimans and Pouches,
With Sashes, Turbans, and Paboutches,
(While Y—RM—th's sketching out a plan
Of new Moustaches ά VOttomane)
And all things fitting and expedient
To turkify our gracious R—G—NT!
You, therefore, have no time to waste—
So, send your System.—
Your's, in haste.
POSTSCRIPT.
Before I send this scrawl away,
I seize a moment, just to say,
There’s some parts of the Turkish system
So vulgar, 'twere as well you miss’d 'em.
For instance—in Seraglio matters—
Your Turk, whom girlish fondness flatters,
Would fill his Haram (tasteless fool!)
With tittering, red-cheek’d things from school—
But here (as in that fairy land,
Where Love and Age went hand in hand*;
*	The learned Colonel must allude here to a description
of the Mysterious Isle, in the History of Abdalla, Son of
Hanif, where such inversions of the order of nature are
said to have taken place.—“ A score of old women and the
same number of old men played here and there in the
court, some at chuck-farthing, others at tip-cat or at
cockles.1'—And again, “ There is nothing, believe me, more
engaging than those lovely wrinkles, &c. &c.”—See Tales
of the East, Vol. III. pp. 607, 608.
Where lips, till sixty, shed no honey,
And Grandams were worth any money)
Our Sultan has much riper notions—
So, let your list of eAe-promotions
Include those only, plump and sage,
WhoVe reach'd the regulation-age;
That is—as near as one can fix
From Peerage dates—full fifty-six!
This rule’s for fav’rites—nothing more—
For, as to wives, a Grand Signor,
Though not decidedly without them,
Need never care one curse about them.
LETTER III.
FROM G. R. TO THE E------------ OF Y------------- .
We miss’d you last night at the ** hoary old sinner’s,”
Who gave us, as usual, the cream of good dinners—
His soups scientific—his fishes quite prime—
His pat6s superb—and his cutlets sublime!
In short, 'twas the snug sort pf dinner to stir a
Stomachic orgasm in my Lord E----------------GH,
Who set to, to be sure, with miraculous force,
And exclaim’d, between mouthfuls, “ a He-Cook,
of course!—
“ While you live—(what’s there under that cover,
pray, look)—
“ While you live—(I’ll just taste it)—ne’er keep a
, She-Cook.
*	This letter, as the reader will perceive, was written the
day after a dinner, given by the M----of H--------.
“ Tis a sound Salic Law—(a small bit of that toast)—
“ Which ordains that a female shall ne*er rule the
roast;
“ For Cookery's a secret—(this turtle's uncom-
mon)—
“ Like Masonry, never found out by a woman!”
The dinner, you know, was in gay celebration
Of my brilliant triumph and H—t’s condemnation;
A compliment too to his Lordship the J----e
For his Speech to the* J—y—and zounds! who
would grudge
Turtle-soup, though it came to five guineas a bowl,
To reward such a loyal-and complaisant soul?
We were all in high gig—Roman Punch and Tokay
TravelPd round, till our. heads travell'd just the same
way;
And we car'd not for Juries or Libels—no—damme!
nor
Ev’n for the threats of last Sunday's Examiner!
More good things were eaten than said—but Tom
T—RRH—T
In quoting Joe Miller, you know, has some merit,
And, hearing the sturdy Justiciary Chief
Say—sated with turtle—“ I’ll now try the beef"—
Tommy whisper’d him (giving his Lordship a sly hit)
“ I fear 'twill be Awwg-beef, my Lord, if you try it!"
And C—md—n was there, who, that morning, had
gone
To fit his new Marquis's-coronet on;
And the dish set before him—oh dish well-devis’d!—
Was, what old Mother Glasse calls, “ a calf's-
head surpris’d!” ’
The brains were near------------; and once they’d been
fine,
But, of late, they had lain so long soaking in wine,
That, however we still might, in courtesy, call
Them a fine dish of brains, they were no brains at all.
When the dinner was over, we drank, every one
In a bumper, “ the venial delights of Crim. Con/'
At which H--------T with warm reminiscences gloated,
Aud £—b'b—H chuckled to hear himself quoted.
Our next round of toasts was a fancy quite new,
For we drank—and you’ll own 'twas benevolent too—
To those well-meaning husbands, cits, parsons, or
peers,
Whom we’ve, any time, honour'd by kissing their
dears:
This museum of wittols was comical rather;
Old Η-------T gave M--------y, and I gave--------------.
In short, not a soul till this morning would budge—
We were all fun and frolic!—and even the J-------------e
Laid aside, for the time, his juridical fashion,
And through the whole night was not once in a passion!
I write this in bed, while my whiskers are airing,
And M—c has a sly dose of jalup preparing
Forpoor T—mm y T—rr—τ at breakfast to quaff—
As I feel I want something to give me a laugh,
And there’s nothing so good as' old T—mmy, kept
close
To his Cornwall accounts, after taking a dose!
LETTER IV.
FROM THE RIGHT HON. P-TR-CK D—G—N—N
TO THE RIGHT HON. SIR J—HN N—CH—L.
Dublin ·.
Last week, dear N—ch—l, making merry
At dinner with our Secretary,
When all were drunk, or pretty near,
(The time for doing business here)
Says he to me, “ Sweet Bully Bottom!
“ These Papist dogs—hiccup—od rot 'em!
“ Deserve to be bespatter’d—hiccup—
“ With all the dirt ev’n you can pick up—
*	This letter, which contained some very heavy in·
closures, seems to have been sent to London by a private
hand, and then put into the Twopenny Post-Office, to save
trouble.
“ But, as the P—E—(here's to him—fill—
“ Hip, hip, hurra!)—is trying still
“ To humbug them with kind professions,
“ And, as you deal in strong expressions—
“ Rogue”—“ traitorv—hiccup—and all that—
“ You must be muzzled, Doctor Pat !—
“ You must indeed—hiccup—that's flat.”—
Yes—" muzzled” was the word, Sir John—
These fools have clapp'd a muzzle on
The boldest mouth that e'er ran o'er
With slaver of the times of yore *!—
Was it for this that back I went
As far as Lateran and Trent,
To prove that they, who damn'd us then,
Ought now, in turn, be damn'd again!—
The silent victim still to sit
Of Gr—tt—N's fire and C—nn—g's wit,
To hear ev'n noisy M—th—w gabble on,
Nor mention once the W—e of Babylon!
*	In sending this sheet to the Press, however, I loam
that the “ muzzle1’ has been taken off, and the Right Hon.
Doctor let loose again!
Oh! ’tis too much—who now will be
The Nightman of No-Popery 1
What Courtier, Saint, or even Bishop,
Such learned filth will ever fish up ?
If there among our ranks be one
To take my place, ’tis thou, Sir John—
Thou—who, like me, art dubb’d Right Hon.
Like me too, art a Lawyer Civil
That wishes Papists at the devil!
To whom then but to thee, my friend,
Should Patrick* his Port-folio send?
Take it—'tis thine—his learn’d Port-folio,
With all its theologic olio
Of Bulls, half Irish and half Roman,—
Of Doctrines, now believ’d by no man—
Of Councils, held for men’s salvation,
Yet always ending in damnation—
(Which shows that, since the world's creation,
*	This is a bad name for poetry; but D—gen—n is
worse.—As Prudentius says upon a very different subject—
torquetur Apollo
Nomine percussus. 4
Your Priests, whate’er tlieir gentle shamming,
Have always had a taste for damning)
And many more such pious scraps,
To prove (what we’ve long prov’d perhaps)
That, mad as Christians us’d to be
About the Thirteenth Century,
There’s lots of Christians to be had
Id this, the Nineteenth, just as mad!
Farewell—I send with this, dear N—ch—L!
A rod or two I’ve had in pickle
Wherewith to trim old Gr—tt—N’s jacket,—
The rest shall go by Monday's packet.
P. D.
Among the Inclosures in the foregoing Letter was
the following “ Unanswerable Argument against
the Papists”
* * *
We’re told the ancient Roman nation
Made use of spittle in lustration*.—
(Vide Lactantium ap. Gallaeum—+
i. e. you need not read but see ’em)
Now, Irish Papists (fact surprising!)
Make use of spittle in baptizing,
Which proves them all, 0‘Finns, 0‘Fagans,
Connors, and Tooles, all downright pagans!
•--------------lustralibus ante salivis
”	Expiat.	Pers. Sat. 2.
t I have taken the trouble of examining the Doctor’s re-
ference here, and find him, for once, correct. The follow-
ing are the words of his indignant referel Gallseus—“ As-
serere non veremur sacrum baptismum a Papistis profanari,
et sputi usum in peccatorum expiatione a Paganis non a
Christianis manasse.”
This fact’s enough—let no one tell us
To free such sad, salivous fellows—
No—No—the man, baptiz’d with spittle,
Hath no truth in him—not a tittle!
*	* *
LETTER V.
FROM THE COUNTESS DOWAGER OF C------------------
TO LADY ---------.--.
My dear Lady-----------! Fve been just sending out
About five hundred cards for a snug little Rout—*
(By the bye, you've seen Rokeby?—this moment
got mine—
The Mail-Coach Edition*—prodigiously fine!)
But I can't conceive how, in this very cold weather,
Fm ever to bring my five hundred together;
As, unless the thermometer's near boiling heat,
One can never get half of one's hundreds to meet—
(Apropos—you'd have laugh'd to see Townsend,
last night,
Escort to their chairs, with his staff so polite,
The “ three maiden Miseries," all in a fright!
*	See Mr. Murray’s Advertisement about the Mail-Coach
copies of Kokeby.
Poor Townsend, like Mercury, filling two posts,
Supervisor of thieves, and chief-usher of ghosts!)
But, my dear Lady ------------! can't you hit on
some notion,
At least for one night to set London in motion 1—
As to having the R—G—NT—that show is gone by—
Besides, I've remark'd that (between you and I)
The Marchesa and he, inconvenient in more ways,
Have taken much lately to whispering in door-ways;
Which—consid'ring, you know, dear, the size of the
two—
Makes a block that one’s company cannot get
through,
And a house such as mine is, with door-ways so small,
Has no room for such cumbersome love-work at all!—
(Apropos, though, of love-work—you've heard it, I
hope,
That Napoleon's old Mother's to* marry the
Pope,—
What a comical pair!)—but, to stick to my Rout,
Twill be hard if some novelty can't be struck out.
Is there no Algerine, no Kamchatkan arriv'd?
No Plenipo Pacha, three-tail'd and ten-wiv’dl
No Russian, whose dissonant consonant name
Almost rattles to fragments the trumpet of Fame!
I remember the time, three or four winters back,
When—provided their wigs were but decently
black—
A few Patriot monsters, from Spain, were a sight
That would people one's house for one, night after
night.
But—whether the Ministers paw'd them too much—
(And you know how they spoil whatsoever they
touch)
Or, whether Lord G—bge (the young man about
town)
Has, by dint of bad poetry, written them down—
One has certainly lost one’s peninsular rage,
And the only stray Patriot seen for an age
Has been at such places (think, how the fit eools)
As old Mrs. V-----n’s or Lord L—v—rp—i/s!
But, in short, my dear, names like Wintztschit-
STOPSCHIN ZOUDHOFF.
Are the only things now make an evening go smooth
off—
So, get me a Russian—till death I'm your debtor—
If he brings the whole Alphabet, so much the better.
And—Lord! if he would but, in character, sup
Off his train-oil and candles, he’d quite set me up!
Au revair, my sweet girl—I must leave you in haste—
Little Gunter has brought me the Liqueurs to taste.
POSTSCRIPT.
By the bye, have you found any friend that can
construe
That Latin account, t'other day, of a Monster*?
If we can't get a Russian, and that thing in Latin
Be not too improper, I think I’ll bring that in.
*	Alluding, I suppose, to the Latin Advertisement of a
Lusus Naturae in the Newspapers lately.
LETTER VI.
FROM ABDALLAH*, IN LONDON, TO MOHASSAN,
IN ISPAHAN.
Whilst thou, Mohassan, (happy thou!)
Dost daily bend thy loyal brow
Before our King—our Asia's treasure!
Nutmeg of Comfort! Rose of Pleasure!—
And bear’st as many kicks and bruises
As the said Rose and Nutmeg chooses;—
Thy head still near the bowstring’s borders,
And but left on till further orders!—
*	I have made many inquiries about this Persian gentle-
man, but cannot satisfactorily ascertain who he is. From
his notions of Religious Liberty, however, I conclude that
he is an importation of Ministers; and he is'arrived just in
time to assist the P---s and Mr. L—ck—s in their new
Oriental Plan of Reform.—See the second of these Letters.
—How Abdallah’s epistle to Ispahan found its way into the
Twopenny Post-Bag is more than I can pretend to account
for.
Through London streets, with turban fair,
And caftan, floating to the air,
I saunter on—the admiration
Of this short-coated population—
This sewM-up race—this button’d nation—
Who, while they boast their laws so free,
Leave not one limb at liberty,
But live, with all their lordly speeches,
The slaves of buttons and tight breeches!
Yet, though they thus their knee-pans fetter,
(They're Christians, and they know no better)*
In some things they’re a thinking nation—
And, on Religious Toleration,
I own I like their notions quite,
They are so Persian and so right!
You know our Sunnites +, hateful dogs!
Whom every pious Shiite flogs
*	“ C’est an lionnfete homme,” said a Turkish governor
of De Ruyter, “ c’est grand dommage qu’il soit Chre-
tien.”
t Sunnites and Shiites are the two leading sects into
which the Mahometan world is divided; and they have
Or longs to flog*—*tis true, they pray
To God, but in an ill-bred way;
With neither arms, nor legs, nor faces
Stuck in their right, canonic places t!
*Tis true, they worship Ali’s name χ—
Their Heaven and ours are just the same—
(A Persian’s Heav’n is eas’ly made,
Tis but—black eyes and lemonade.)
gone on caning and persecuting each other, without any
intermission, for about eleven hundred years. The Sunm is
the established sect in Turkey, and the Shia in Persia; and
the differences between them turn chiefly upon those im-
portant points, which our pious friend Abdallah, in the true
spirit of Shiite Ascendancy, reprobates in this Letter.
*	“ Lee Sunnites, qui etoient comme les Catholiques de
Musulmanisme.”	D’Herbelot.
t In contradistinction to the Sounis, who in their prayers
cross their hands on the lower part of the breast, the
Schiahs drop their arms in straight lines; and as the Sonnis,
at certain periods of the prayer, press their foreheads on
the ground or carpet, the Schiahs, See. &c.”
Fonter'i Voyage.
t “ Les Turcs ne detestent pas Ali reciproquement; ao
contraire ils le reconnoissent, &c. &c.”	Chardin.
Yet—though we've tried for centuries back—
We can’t persuade the stubborn pack,
By bastinadoes, screws, or nippers,
To wear th’ establish’d pea-green slippers*!
Then—only think—the libertines!
They wash their toes—they comb their chins t
With many more such deadly sins!
And (what’s the worst, though last I rank it)
Believe the Chapter of the Blanket!
Yet, spite of tenets so flagitious,
(Which must, at bottom, be seditious;
As no man living would refuse
Green slippers, but from treasonous views;
Nor wash his toes, but with intent
To overturn the Government!)
Such is our mild and tolerant way,
We only curse them twice a day,
*	^ The Shiites wear green slippers, which the Snnnites
consider as a great abomination.”	Mariti.
t For these points of difference, as well as for the Chap-
ter of the Blanket, I must refer the reader (not having the
book by me) to Picart’s Account of the Mahometan
Sects.
(According to a Form that’s set)
And, far from torturing, only let
All orthodox believers beat ’em,
And twitch their beards, where’er they meet ’em.
As to the rest, they’re free to do
Whate’er their fancy prompts them to,
Provided they make nothing of it
Tow’rds rank or honour, power or profit;
Which things, we naf rally expect,
Belong to us, the Establish’d sect,
Who disbelieve (the Lord be thanked!)
Th’ aforesaid Chapter of the Blanket.
The same mild views of Toleration
Inspire, I find, this button’d nation,
Whose Papists (full as giv’n to rogue,
And only Sunnites with a brogue)
Fare just as well, with all their fuss,
As rascal Sunnites do with us.
LETTER VII.
FROM MESSRS. L—CK—GT—N AND CO.
ΌΟ----------------------, ESQ*.
Per Post, Sir, we send your MS.—look’d it thro'—
Very sorry—but can’t undertake—’twouldn’t do.
Clever work, Sir!—would get up prodigiously well—
Its only defect is—it never would sell!
And though Statesmen may glory in being unbought,
In an Author, we think, Sir, that’s rather a fault.
Hard times, Sir,—most books are too dear to be
read—
Though the gold of Good-sense and Wit’s small-
change are fled,
Yet the paper we Publishers pass, in their stead,
*	From motives of delicacy, and, indeed, of feltew-fed·
ingy I suppress the name of the Author, whose rejected
manuscript was inclosed in this letter.—See the Appendix
for this and other enclosures.
Rises higher each day, and ('tis frightful to think it)
Not even such names as F—tzg—R—d's can sink
it!
However, Sir—if you’re for trying again,
And at somewhat that’s vendible—we are your
men.
Since the Chevalier C—RR took to marrying lately,
The Trade is in want of a Traveller greatly—
No job, Sir, more easy—your Country once plann’d,
A month aboard ship and a fortnight on land
Puts your Quarto of Travels, Sir, clean out of
hand.
An East-India pamphlet's a thing that would tell—
And a lick at the Papists is sure to sell well.
Or—supposing you've nothing original in you—
Write Parodies, Sir, and such fame it will win you,
You'll get to the Blue-stocking Routs of Alb-n-a *!
*	This alludes, I believe, to a curious correspondence,
which is said to have passed lately between Alb—n—a,
Countess of B—ck—gh—ms—e, and a certain ingenious
Parodist.
(Mind—not to her dinners—a second-hand Muse
Mustn’t think of aspiring to mess with the Blues.)
Or—in case nothing else in this world you can do—
The deuce is in’t, Sir, if you cannot review!
Should you feel any touch of poetical glow,
We’ve a Scheme to suggest—Mr. Sc—tt, you must
know,
(Who, we’re sorry to say it, now works for the Row*)
Having quitted the Borders, to seek new renown,
Is coming, by long Quarto stages, to Town;
And beginning with Rokeby (the job’s sure to pay)
Means to do all the Gentlemen’s Seats on the way.
Now, the Scheme is (though none of our hackneys
can beat him)
To start a fresh Poet through Highgate to meet him;
Who, by means of quick proofs—no revises—long
coaches—
May do a few Villas, before Sc—tt approaches—
Indeed, if our Pegasus be not curst shabby,
He’ll reach, without found’ring, at least Woburn-
Abbey.
*	Paternoster Row.
Such, Sir, is our plan—if you’re up to the freak,
Tis a match! and well put you in training next
week—
At present, no more—in reply to this Letter, a
Line will oblige very much
Your's, et cetera.
Temple of the Muses,
LETTER VIII.
FROM COLONEL ΤΗ—M—S TO --------------------
-------, ESQ.
Come to our F£te*, and bring with tliee
Thy newest, best embroidery!
Come to our Fkte, and show again
That pea-green coat, thou pink of men!
Which charm’d all eyes, that last survey’d it;
When B-------l’s self inquir’d “ who made it?"—
When Cits came wond’ring, from the East,
And thought thee Poet Py£ at least!
Oh! come—(if haply ’tis thy week
For looking pale)—with paly cheek;
Though more we love thy roseate days,
When the rich rouge-pot pours its blaze
*	This Letter inclosed a Card for the Grand F£te on the
5th of February.
Full o’er thy face, and, amply spread,
Tips ev’n thy whisker-tops with red—
Like the last tints of dying Day
That o’er some darkling grove delay!
Bring thy best lace, thou gay Philander!
(That lace, like H—RRY Al—x—nd—R,
Too precious to be wash'd!)—thy rings,
Thy seals—in short, thy prettiest things!
Put all thy wardrobe’s glories on,
And yield, in frogs and fringe, to none
But the great R—G—t’s self alone!
Who—by particular desire—
For that night only, means to hire
A dress from Romeo C—tes, Esquire—
Something between (’twere sin to hack it)
The Romeo robe and Hobby jacket!
Hail, first of Actors *! best of R—G—ts !
Born for each other’s fond allegiance!
*	Quem tn, Melpomene, semel
Nascentem placid# lumine, videris, &c.	if orat.
The Man, upon whom thou hast deign’d to look funny,
Thou great Tragic Muse! at the hour of his birth—
. Let them say what they will, that's the Man for my money,
Give others thy tears, but let me have thy mirth 1
Both gay Lotharios—both good dressers—
Of Serious Farce both learn’d Professors—
Both circled round, for use or show,
With cock’s-combs, wheresoe'er they go!
Thou know’st the time, thou man of lore!
It takes to chalk a ball-room floor—
Thou know'st the time too, well-a-day!
It takes to dance that chalk away*.
The Ball-room opens—far and nigh
Comets and suns beneath us lie;
O’er snowy moons and stars we walk,
And the floor seems a sky of chalk!
But soon shall fade the bright deceit,
When many a maid, with busy feet
The assertion that follows, however, is not verified in the
instance before us.
Ilium-------------------------
---------non equns impiger
Curru ducet Achaico,	,
*	To those, who neither go to balls nor read the Morning
Post, it may be necessary to mention that the floors of
Ball-rooms, in general, are chalked, for safety and for orna-
ment, with various fanciful devices.
That sparkle in the Lustre's ray,
O’er the white path shall bound and play
Like Nymphs along the Milky Way!—
At every step a star is fled,
And suns grow dim beneath their tread!
So passeth life—(thus Sc—tt would write,
And spinsters read him with delight)—
Hours are not feet, yet hours trip on,
Time is not chalk, yet time’s soon gone*!
But, hang this long digressive flight!
I meant to say, thou’lt see, that night,
What falsehood rankles in their hearts,
Who say the P---------E neglects the arts—
Neglects the arts!—no S——! no;
Thy Cupids answer “ ’tis not so;”
And every floor, that night, shall tell
How quick thou daubest, and how well!
Shine as thou may’st in French vermillion,
Thou’rt best—beneath a French cotillion;
*	Hearts are not flint, yet flints are rent,
Hearts are not steel, yet steel is bent.
After all, however, Mr. Sc—tt may well say to the Colonel,
(and, indeed, to much better wags than the Colonel,) ξ&ο»
/χωμ,ιισ^α» t) /χιμ,ιισ^Λΐ
And still com’st off, whatever thy faults,
With flying colours in a Waltz!
Nor need’st thou mourn the transient date
To thy best works assign’d by fate—
While some chef-d’oeuvres live to weary one,
Thine boast a short life and a merry one;
Their hour of glory past and gone
With “ Molly, put the kettle on !”
But, bless my soul! I've scarce a leaf
Of paper left—so, must be brief.
This festive Tbte, in fact, will be
The former Fate's facsimile* ;
The same long Masquerade of Rooms,
Trick’d in such different, quaint costumes,
(These, P—rt—R, are thy glorious works!)
You’d swear Egyptians, Moors and Turks,
Bearing Good-Taste some deadly malice
Had clubb’d to raise a Pic-Nic Palace;
•	“ c—rl—t—η H---------e will exhibit a complete /ao
simile, in respect to interior ornament, to what it did at the
last F£te. The same splendid draperies, &c. &c.”
Morning· Post.
And each, to make the oglio pleasant,
Had sent a State-Room as a present!—
The same fauteuih and girandoles—
The same gold Asses*, pretty souls!
That, in this rich and classic dome,
Appear so perfectly at home!
The same bright river ’mongst the dishes,
But not—ah! not the same dear fishes—
Late hours and claret kill’d the old ones !—
So, ’stead of silver and of gold ones,
(It being rather hard to raise
Fish of that specie now-a-days)
Some Sprats have been, by Y—rm—th’s wish,
Promoted into Silver Fish,
And Gudgeons (so V—ns—ττ—τ told
The R—g—t) are as good as Gold!
So, pr'ythee, come—our F£te will be
But half a F&te, if wanting thee!
J. T.
*	The salt-cellars on the P--e’s own table were in the
form of an Ass with panniers.
TRIFLES
REPRINTED.
ΣΧΟΛΑΖΟΝΤΟΣ ΑΣΧΟΛΙΑ.
TRIFLES.
THE INSURRECTION OF THE PAPERS.
A DREAM.
“ It would be impossible for hie Royal Highness to dis-
engage his person from the accumulating pile of papers that
encompassed it.”
Lord Castlereaoh’s Speech upon Colonel
M‘Mahon’8 Appointment.
Last night I toss’d and turn'd in bed,
But could not sleep—at length I said
" Γ11 think of Viscount C—stl—R—gh,
“ And of his speeches—that’s the way.”
And so it was, for instantly
1 slept as sound as sound could be.
And then I dream'd—oh frightful dream!
Fuseli has no such theme;
-------never wrote or borrow'd
Any horror, half so horrid!
Methought the P--------E, in whisker'd state,
Before me at his breakfast sate;
On one side lay unread Petitions,
On t'other, Hints from five Physicians—
Here tradesmen’s bills, official papers,
Notes from my Lady, drams for vapours—
There plans of saddles, tea and toast,
Death-warrants and the Morning Post.
When lo! the Papers, one and all,
As if at some magician's call,
Began to flutter of themselves
From desk and table, floor and shelves.
And, cutting each .some different capers,
Advanc'd, oh Jacobinic papers!
As though they said, “ oar sole design i»
“ To suffocate his Royal Highness!”
The Leader of this vile sedition
Was a huge Catholic Petition,
With grievances so full and heavy,
It threaten’d worst of all the bevy.
Then Common-Hall Addresses came
. " * . .
In swaggering sheets, and took their aim
Right at the R—g—t's well-dress’d head,
As if determin'd to be read!
Next Tradesmen's Bills began to fly, e
And Tradesmen’s Bills, we know, mount high;
Nay ev’n Death-Warrants thought they’d best
Be lively too, and join the rest.
But, oh the basest of defections!
His Letter about “ predilections”—
His own dear Letter, void of grace,
Now flew up in its parent’s face!
Shock’d with this breach of filial duty,
He just could murmur “ et Tu, BruteT*
Then sunk, subdued upon the floor
At Fox’s bust, to rise no more!
I wak’d—and pray’d, with lifted hand,
“ Oh! never may this Dream prove true;
“ Though Paper overwhelms the land,
“ Let it not crush the Sovereign too I”
PARODY
OF A CELEBRATED LETTER.
At length, dearest Freddy, the moment is nigh,
When, with P—rc—v—l's leave, I may throw my
chains by;
And, as time now is precious, the first thing I do,
Is to sit down and write a wise letter to you.
* · * * -
*	*	*
*	* '	*
*	*	*
*	m	*
*	*	*
I meant before now to have sent you this Letter,
But Y—RM-1th and I thought perhaps ’twould be
better
To wait till the Irish affairs were decided—
That ts> till both Houses had prosed and divided,
With all due appearance of thought and digestion—
For, though H—rtf—rd House had long settled
the question,
I thought it but decent, between me and you,
That the two other Houses should settle it too.
I need not remind you how cursedly bad
Our affairs were all looking, when Father went mad;
A strait waistcoat on him and restrictions on me,
A more limited Monarchy could not well be.
I was call’d upon then, in that moment of puzzle,
To choose my own Minister—just as they muzzle
A playful young bear, and then mock his disaster,
By bidding him choose out his own dancing-master.
I thought the best way, as a dutiful son,
Was to do as Old Royalty’s self would have done.
Sol sent word to say, I would keep the whole batch in,
The same chest of tools, without cleansing or
patching;
For tools of this kind, like Martinus’s sconce*,
Would lose all their beauty, if purified once;
*	The antique shield of Martinos Scriblerus, which, upon
scouring, turned out to be only an old Sconce.
And think—only think—if our Father should find,
Upon graciously coming again to his mind,
That improvement had spoiPd any favourite adviser—
That R—se was grown honest,or W-stm-BEL-nd
wiser-
That R—D—R was,ev’n by one twinkle, the brighter—
Or L-v-rp^l's speeches but half a pound lighter—
What a shock to his old royal heart it would be!
No!—far were such dreams of improvement from me:
And it pleased me to find, at the house, where, you
know,
There’s such good mutton cutlets, and strong
qurapoa*,
That the Marchioness call'd me a duteous old boy,
And my Y—rm—th’s red whiskers grew redder
for joy!
You know, my dear Freddy, how oft, if I would>
By the law of last Sessions I might have done good.
I might have withheld these political noodles *
From knocking their heads against hot Yankee
Doodles;
*	The letter-writer’s favourite lunrkeoo.
I might have told Ireland I pitied her lot,
Might have sooth’d her with hope—but you know I
did not·
And my wish is, in truth, that the best of old fellows
Should not, on recovering, have cause to be jealous.
But find that, while he has been laid on the shelf,
We’ve been all of us nearly as mad as himself.
You smile at my hopes—but the Doctors and I,
Are the last that can think the K—NG ever will die!
A new era’s arriv'd—though you’d hardly believe
it—
And all things, of course, must be new to receive it.
New villas, new ffctes (which ev’n Waithman
attends)—
New saddles, new helmets, and—why not new
friend*?
m	*	*
*	*	*
I repeat it “ New Friends”—for I cannot describe
The delight I am in with this P—rc—v—L tribe.
Such capering!—Such vapouring!—Such rigour!—
Such vigour!
North, South, East, and West, they have cut puch
a figure,
That soon they will bring the whole world round
our ears,	*
And leave us no friends—but Old Nick and Algiers.
When 1 think of the glory they've beam'd on my
chains,
Tis enough quite to turn my illustrious brains!
It is true we are bankrupts in commerce and
riches,
But think how we furnish our Allies with breeches!
We’ve lost the warm hearts of the Irish, 'tis granted,
But then we've got Java, an island much wanted,
To put t,he last lingering few who remain,
Of the Walcheren warriors, out of their pain.
Then how Wellington fights! and how squabbles
his brother!
For Papists the one, and with Papists the other;
One crushing Napoleon by taking a City,
While t’other lays waste a whole Cath’lic Committee!
Oh deeds of renown {—shall I boggle or flinch,
With such prospects before me? by Jove, not an
inch.
No—let England’s affairs go to rack, if they will,
We’ll look after th’ affairs of the Continent still,
And, with nothing at home but starvation and riot,
Find Lisbon in bread, and keep Sicily quiet.
I am proud to declare I have no predilections,
My heart is a sieve, where some scatter’d affections
Are just danc’d about for a moment or two,
And the finer they are, the more sure to run through:
Neither have I resentments, nor wish there should
come ill
To mortal—except (now I think on’t) Beau
Br—mm—l,	-
Who threaten’d, last year, in a superfine passion,
To cut me, and bring the old K—ng into fashion.
This is all I can lay to my conscience at present,
When such is my temper, so neutral, so pleasant,
So royally free from all troublesome feelings,
So little encumber’d by faith in my dealings,
(And that Fm consistent the world will allow,
What I was at Newmarket, the same I am now.)
When such are my merits (you know I hate cracking,)
I hope, like the Vender of Best Patent Blacking,
“ To meet with the gen'rous and kind approbation
Of a candid, enlighten’d, and liberal nation/'
By the bye, ere I close this magnificent Letter,
(No man, except Pole, could have writ you a
better.)
*Twould please me if those, whom I've humbug’d so
long
With the notion (good men!) that I knew right from
wrong,
Would a few of them join me—mind, only a few—
To let too much light in on me never would do;
But even Grey’s brightness sha’n’t make me afraid,
While I’ve C—md—N and Eld—N to fly to for shade;
Nor will Holland’s clear intellect do us much
harm,
While there's W—stm—rel—nd near him to
weaken the charm.	‘
As for Moira’s high spirit, if aught can subdue it,
Sure joining with H—rtf—rd and Y—rm—th
will do it!
Between R—d—r and Wh-rt—n let Sheridan
sit,
And the fogs will soon quench even Sheridan’s
wit;
And against all the pure public feeling that glows
Ev’n in Whitbread himself we’ve a Host in,
G—roe R—se !
So, in short, if they wish to have Places, they may,
And I’ll thank you to tell all these matters to Grey,
Who, I doubt not, will write (as there’s no time to
lose,)
By the twopenny post to tell Grenville the news;
And now, dearest Fred,(though I’ve no predilection,)
Believe me your’s always with truest affection.
P. S. A copy of this is to P—RC—L going—
Good Lord! how St. Stephens will ring with his
crowing!
TO A PLUMASSIER.
Fine and feathery artisan!
Best of Plumists, if you can
With your art so far presume,
Make for me a P------------e’s Plume—
Feathers soft and feathers rare,
Such as suits a P------E to wear!
First, thou downiest of men!
Seek me out a fine Pea-hen;
Such a Hen, so tall and grand,
As by Juno’s side might stand,
If there were no Cocks at hand!
Seek her feathers, soft as down,
Fit to shine on P----------e's crown;
If thou canst not find them, stupid!
Ask the way of Prior’s Cupid.
Ranging these in order due,
Pluck me next an old Cuckoo;
Emblem of the happy fates
Of easy, kind, cornuted mates!
Pluck him well—be sure you do—
Who wouldn’t be an old Cuckoo,
Thus to have his plumage blest,
Beaming on a R—y—1 crest 1
Bravo, Plumist !-rnow what bird
Shall we find for Plume the third ?
You must get a learned Owl,
Bleakest of black-letter fowl—
Bigot bird, that hates the light,
Foe to all that's fair and bright!
Seize his quills, (so form'd to pen
Books, that shun the search of men;
Books, that, for from every eye,
In “ swelter'd venom sleeping" lie!)
Stick them in between the two,
Proud Pea-hen and old Cuckoo.
Now you have the triple feather,
Bind the kindred stems together
With a silken tie, whose hue
Once was brilliant Buff and Blue;
Sullied now—alas how much!
Only fit for Y—rm—th’s touch.
There—enough—thy task is done ;
Present worthy G—ge’s Son!
Now, beneath, in letters neat*
Write “ I serve” and all’s complete.
/
EXTRACTS
FROM THE DIARY OF A POLITICIAN.
Wednesday.
Through M—nch—st—r Square took a canter
just now—
Met the old yellow chariot, and made a low bow.
This I did, of course, thinking 'twas loyal and civil,
But got such a look—oh 'twas black as the devil!
How unlucky!—incog, he was traveling about,
And I, like a noodle, must go find him out!
Mem.—when next by the old yellow chariot I ride,
To remember there is nothing Princely inside.
Thursday.
At Levee to-day made another sad blunder—
What can be come over me lately, I wonder?
The Ρ------E was as cheerful, as if, all his life,
He had never been troubled with Friends or a Wife—
“ tine weather” says he—to which I, who must prate,
Answer’d “ yes, Sir, but changeable rather, of late.”
He took it, I fear, for he look’d somewhat gruff,
And handled his new pair of whiskers so rough,
That before all the courtiers I fear’d they’d come off,
And then, Lord, how Geramb would triumphantly
scoff!
Mem.—to buy for son Dicky some unguent or lotion
To nourish his whiskers—sure road to promotion *!
■	Saturday.
Last night a Concert—vastly gay—
Given by Lady C—stl—R—gh.
My Lord loves music, and, we know,
Has two strings always to his bow.
In choosing songs, the R—G—T nam’d
“ Had la heart far falsehood fram'd."
While gentle H—RTF—d begg’d and pray’d .
For “ Young I am and sore afraid.”
•	England is not the only country, where merit of this
kind is noticed and rewarded. u I remember* says Taver-
nier “ to have seen one of the King of Persia’s porters,
whose mustaches were so long that he could tie them behind
his neck, for which reason he had a double pension.’*
EPIGRAM*.
What news, to-day?—" Oh! worse and worse—
“ M—c is the Pr-------e's Privy Purse!”—
The Pr——ce's Purse! no, no, you fool,
You mean the Pr-------ce's Ridicule.
*	This is a bon-mot, attributed, I know not how truly, to
the Pr—c—es of W—es. I have merely versified it.
KING CRACK* AND HIS IDOLS.
WRITTEN AFTER THE LATE NEGOCIATION FOR
A NEW M—N—STRY.
King Crack was the best of all possible Kings,
(At least, so his Courtiers would swear to you
gladly.)
But Crack now and then would do hef rodox things,
And, at last, took to worshipping Images sadly.
Some broken-down Idols, that long had been plac’d
In his Father’s old Cabinet, pleas’d him so much,
That he knelt down and worshipp’d, though—such
was his taste!—	'
They were monstrous to look at and rotten to
touch!
* One of those antediluvian Princes, with whom Manetho
and Whiston seem so intimately acquainted· If we had
the Memoirs of Thoth, from which Manetho compiled his
History, we should find, I dare say, that Crack was only
a Regent, and that he, perhaps, succeeded Typhon, who
(as Whiston says) was the last King of the Antedilnvian
Dynasty.
And these were th$ beautiful Gods of King
Crack !—
Till his People, disdaining to worship such things,
Cried aloud, one and all, “ Cone, your Godships
must pack—
“ You will not do for us, though you may do for
Kings”
Then, trampling the gross Idols under their feet,
They sent Crack a petition, beginning “ Great
Caesar!
“ We are willing to worship; but only entreat
“ That you'll find us some decenter Godheads
than these are.’*
M Γ11 try,” says King Crack—then they furnish'd
9 him models
Of better-shap'd Gods, but he sent them all
back;
Some were chisell'd too fine, some had heads 'stead
of noddles,
In short, they were all much too godlike for,
Crack!
*
So he took to his darling old «Idols again,
And, just mending their legs and new bronzing
their faces,
In open defiance of Gods and of men,
Set the monsters up grinning once more in their
places!
WHAT’S MY THOUGHT LIKE?
Quest. Why is a Pump like V—sc—NT C—stl—
*	R—GH?
Answ. Because it is a slender thing of wood,
That up and down its awkward arm doth sway,
And coolly spout and spout and spout away,
In one weak, washy, everlasting flood!
EPIGRAM.
DIALOGUE BETWEEN A CATHOLIC DELEGATE
AND HIS R—Y—L H—GHN—8S THE D----------E
OF C—B—L—D.	*
Said his Highness to Ned, with that grim face of his,
“ Why refuse us the Veto, dear Catholic
Neddy ?”—
“ Because, Sir,” said Ned, looking full in his phiz,
“ You're forbidding enough, in all conscience,
already!”

AN ANACREONTIC.
Hither, Flora, Queen of Flowers!
Waste thee from Old Brompton’s bowers—
Or, (if sweeter that abode)
From the King’s well-odour’d Road,
Where each little nursery bud
Breathes the dust and quaffs the mud!
Hither come, and gaily twine
Brightest herbs and flowers of thine
Into wreaths for those, who rule us,
Those, who rule and (some say) fool us—
Flora, sure, will love to please
England’s Household Deities*!
*	The ancients, in like manner, crowned their Lares, or
Household Gods. See Jnvenal, Sat. 9. r. 138.—Plutarch
too tells us that Household Gods were then, as they are
now, “ much given to War and penal Statutes.” Ες»νvuZw
κχι <roivifA*s dati/xov&s.
First you must then, willy-nilly,
Fetch me many an Orange lily—	,
Orange of the darkest dye
Irish G—ff—RD can supply!
Choose me out the longest sprig,
And stick it in old Eld—n's wig!
Find me next a Poppy posy,
Type of his harangues so dozy,
Garland gaudy, dull and cool
For the head of L—v—rp—l !—
Twill console his brilliant brows
For that loss of laurel boughs,
Which they suffer'd (what a pity!)
On the road to Parb City.
Next, our C—stl—R—gh to crown,	*
Bring me, from the County Down,
Wither'd Shamrocks, which have been
Gilded o'er, to hide the green—
(Such as H—df—T brought away
From Pall-Mall last PatrickVDay *)
*	Certain tinsel imitations of the Shamrock which arc
distributed by the Servants of C-------n House every
Patrick’s-Day.
Stitch the garland through and through
With shabby threads of every hue—
And as, Goddess!—entre nous—
His Lordship loves (though best of men)
A little torture, now and then,
Crimp the leaves, thou first of Syrens!
Crimp them with thy curling-irons.
That's enough—away, away—
Had I leisure, I could say
How the oldest rose that grows
Must be pluck’d to deck Old R—E—
How the Doctor's brow should smile
Crown'd with wreaths of camomile!
But time presses—to thy taste
I leave the rest, so, prithee, haste!
EPIGRAM.
DIALOGUE BETWEEN A DOWAGER AND HER
MAID ON THE NIGHT OF LORD Y—RM—TH’S
FETE.
“ I want the Court-Guide” said my Lady “ to look
“ If the House, Seymour Place, be at 30 or 20”—
“ We’ve lost the Court-Guide, Ma’am, but here's
the Red Book,
“ Where you'll find, I dare say, Seymour Places
in plenty!”
HORACE, ODE xi. UB. iL
FREELY TRANSLATED BY G. R.*
t Come, Y—RM—th, my boy, never trouble
your brains,
About what your old croney,
The Emperor Boney,
Is doing or brewing on Muscovy's plains;
*	This and the following are extracted from a Work,
which may, some time or other, meet the eye of the Public
—entitled “ Odes of Horace, done into English by several
Persons of Fashion.”
t Quid bellicosus Cantaber et Scythes
Hirpine Quincti, cogitet, Adria
Divisus objecto, remittas
Quaerere.
*	Nor tremble, my lad, at the state of our granaries;
Should there come famine,
Still plenty to cram in
You always shall have, my dear Lord of the
Stannaries!
Brisk let us revel, while revel we may;
t For the gay bloom of fifty soon passes away,
And then people get fat,
And infirm, and—all that,
I And a wig (I confess it) so clumsily sits,
That it frightens the little Loves out of their wits.
§ Thy whiskers, too,Y—rm—th !—alas, even they,
Though so rosy they burn,
Too quickly must turn
. (What a heart-breaking change for thy whiskers!)
to Grey.
#	Nec trepides in usum
Poscentis aevi pauca.
t ---------Fugit retro
Levis juventas et decor.
$ Pellen te lascivos amores
Canicie.
$ -----neque uno Luna rubens nitet
Vultu.
*	Then why, my Lord Warden! oh! why should
you fidget
Your mind about matters you don't understand 1
Or why should you write yourself down for an
idiot,
Because “ you* forsooth, “ have the pen in
your hand!”
Think, think how much better
Than scribbling a letter,
(Which both you and I
Should avoid, by the bye,)
t How much pleasanter 'tis to sit under the bust
Of old Charley, my friend here, and drink
like a new one;	'
While Charley looks sulky and frowns at me,
just
As the Ghost in the Pantomime frowns at Don
Juan!
*--------quid aeternis minorem
Consiliis animum fatigas?
t Cnr non snb alta vel piatano, vel hac
Pina jacentes sic temere-------------------
*	To crown us, Lord Warden!
In C-—mb—rl—nd's garden
Grows plenty of monk's hood in venomous sprigs;
While Otto of Roses
Refreshing all noses
Shall sweetly exhale from our whiskers and wigs.
t What youth of the Household will cool our Noyau
In that streamlet delicious,
That down midst the dishes,
All full of good fishes
Romantic doth flow?—
t Or who will repair
Unto M-----------Sq-----e
And see if the gentle Marchesa be there?
-----------------rosk
Canos odorati capillos
Dum licet, Assyriaque nardo
Potamus uncti.
Quis puer ocyus
Restinguet ardentis Falerni
Pocula prater eunt e lympha?
*	Quis----------------eliciet domo
Lyden?
Go—bid her haste hither,
*	And let her bring with her
The newest No-Popery Sermon that’s going—
t Oh! let her come, with her dark tresses flowing,
All gentle and juvenile, curly and gay,
In the manner of—Ackermann’s Dresses for
May!
*	eburna dic age cum lyrfc (quasi ltar-a)
Maturet.
t Incomtum lacaenae
More comam religata nodum.	'
FREELY TRANSLATED BY LORD ELD—N.
*	The man who keeps a conscience pure,
(If not his own, at least his Prince's,)
Through toil and danger walks secure,
Looks big and black, and never winces I
t No want has he of sword or dagger,
Cock'd hat or ringlets of Geramb;
Though Peers may laugh, and Papists swagger.
He does not care one single d-mn!
*	Integer vitae scelerisque puras.
t Non eget Mauri jaculis neque arcu,
Nec yenenatis gravida sagittis
Fusce, pharetra:
*	Whether midst Irish chairmen going, .
Or through St. Giles's alleys dim,
'Mid drunken Sheelahs, blasting, blowing,
No matter, 'tis all one to him.
t For instance, I, one evening late,
Upon a gay vacation sally,
Singing the praise of Church and State,
Got (God knows how) to Cranbourne-Alley.
•	Sive per Syrteis iter aestuosas,
Sive facturus per inhospitalem .
Caucasum, vel quae loca fabulosus
Lambit Hydaspes.
The Noble Translator had, at first, laid the scene of these
imagined dangers of his Man of Conscience among the
Papists of Spain, and had translated the words “ quae loca
fabulosus lambit Hydaspes” thus—“ The fabling Spaniard
Ucks the Frenchbut, recollecting that it is our interest
just now to be respectful to Spanish Catholics (though there
is certaiuly no earthly reason for our being even commonly
civil to Irish ones,) he altered the passage as it stands at
present.
t Namque me silvft lupus in Sabinfc,
Dum meam canto Lalagen, et ultra
Terminum curis vagor expeditis
Fugit inermem.
When Ιο! an Irish Papist darted
Across my path, gaunt, grim and big—
I did but frown, and off he started,
Scar'd at me even without my wig!
*	Yet a more fierce and raw-bon'd dog
Goes not to Mass in Dublin City,
Nor shakes his brogue o’er Allen's Bog,
Nor spouts in Catholic Committee!
I cannot help calling the reader's attention to the peculiar
ingenuity with which these lines are paraphrased. Not to
mention the happy conversion of the Wolf into a Papist
(seeing that Romulus was suckled by a wolf, that Rome
was founded by Romulus, and that the Pope has always
reigned at Rome,) there is something particularly neat in
supposing “ ultra terminum” to mean vacation-time; and
then the modest consciousness with which the Noble and
Learned Translator has avoided touching upon the words
11 curis expeditis” (or,.as it has been otherwise read,
“ causis expeditis,”) and the felicitous idea of his being
u inermis” when u without his wig,” are altogether the
most delectable specimens of paraphrase in our language.
* Quale portentum neque militaris
Daunia in latis alit aesculetis,
Nec Jubae tellus generat, leonum
*	Arida nutrix.
*	Oh! place me midst O'Rourkes, O’Tooles,
The ragged royal-blood of Tara;
Or place me where Dick M—rt—n rules
The houseless wilds of Connemara ;
t Of Church and State Fll warble still
Though ev'n Dick M—rt—n's self should
grumble;
Sweet Church and State, like Jack and Jill,
t So lovingly upon a hill—
Ah! ne'er like Jack and Jill to tumble!
*	Pone me pigris ubi nulla campis
Arbor aestiva recrcatur aura:
Quod latus mundi, nebulae, malusque
Jupiter urget.
I must here remark, that the said Dick M—rt—n being
a very good fellow, it was not at all fair to make a u malus
Jupiter” of him.
t Dulce ridentem Lalagen amabo
Dulce loquentem.
t There cannot be imagined a more happy illustration of
the inseparability of Church and State, and their (what is
called) “ standing and falling together,” than this ancient
apologue of Jack and Jill. Jack, of course, represents
the State in this ingenious little Allegory.
Jack fell down,
And broke his Crown,
And Jill came tumbling after.
EPIGRAM.
FROM THE FRENCH.
“ I never give a kiss, (says Prue)
“ To naughty man, for I abhor it."—
She will not give a kiss, 'tis true;
Shell take one though, and thank you for it I
ON A SQUINTING POETESS.
To no one Muse does she her glance coniine,
But has an eye, at once, to all the Nine!
TO -----------------------
Moria pur quando vuol, non e bieogna mutar ni foccia ni
voce per esser nn Angelo*.
Die when you will, you need not wear
At Heaven's Court a form more fair
Than Beauty here on earth has given;
Keep but the lovely looks we see—
The voice we hear—and you will be
An angel ready-made for Heaven!
*	The words addressed by Lord Herbert of Cherbury to
the beautiful Nun at Murano.—See his Life.
THE
NEW COSTUME OF THE MINISTERS.
---------NOVA MONSTRA CREAVIT.
.	Odd Metamorph. L. i. c. 437.
Having sent off the troops of brave Major Cam ac,
With a swinging horse-tail at each valorous back,
And such helmets, God bless us! as never deck’d any
Male creature before, except Signor Giovanni—
“ Let's see” said the R—G—τ (like Titus, perplex'd
With the duties of empire) “ whom shall I dress
next?”
He h>oks in the glass—but perfection is there,
Wig, whiskers, and chin-tufts all right to a hair*;
*	That model of Princes, the Emperor Commodus, wae
particularly luxurious in the dressing and ornamenting of
Not a single ex-curl on his forehead he traces—
For curls are like Ministers, strange as the case is,
The falser they are, the more firm in their places.
His coat he next views—but the coat who could
doubt?
For his Y -rm—th’s own Frenchified hand cut
it out;
Every pucker and seam were made matters of state,
And a Grand Household Council was held on each
plait!
Then whom shall he dress? shall he new-rig his
brother
Great C—mb—rl—d’s Duke, with some kickshaw
or other?
his hair. His conscience, however, would not suffer him to
trust himself with a barber, and he used, accordingly, to
born off his beard—“ timore tonsoris” says Lampridius.
(Hist. August. Scriptor.) The dissolute ASlius Verus, too,
was equally attentive to the decoration of his wig. (See
Jul. Capitolin.)—Indeed, this was not the only princely
trait in the character of Verus, as he had likewise a most
hearty and dignified contempt for his Wife·—See his insult
ing answer to her in Spartianus.
And kindly invent him more Christian-like shapes
For his feather-bed neckcloth? and pillory capes?
Ah! no—here his ardour would meet with delays,
For the Duke had been lately, pack’d up in new
Stays,	.
So complete for the winter, he. saw very plain .
'Twould be devilish hard work to unpack him
again!
So, what’s to be done?—there’s the Ministers,
bless ’em!—
As he made the puppets, why shouldn’t he dress ’em ?
“ An excellent thought!—call the tailors—be
nimble—
" Let Cum bring his spy-glass, and H—rtf—d
her thimble;
4* While Y—RM—th shall give us, in spite of all
quizzers,
“ The last Paris cut with his true Gallic scissars.”
So saying, he calls C—stl—R—oh, and the rest
Of his heaven-born statesmen, to come and be
drest.
While Y—RM—τη, with, snip-like and brisk
expedition,
Cuts up, all at once, a large Cath’lic Petition
In long tailors’ measures, (the P—e crying “ well-
done !”)
And first puts in hand my Lord Chancellor Eld—n .
• * «■ *
BETWEEN A LADY AND GENTLEMAN, UPON
THE ADVANTAGE OF (WHAT IS CALLED)
" HAVING LAW ON ONE’S SIDE."
THE GENTLEMAN’S PROPOSAL.
“ LEGGE AUREA,
S’ei piace, ei lice.”
Come, fly to these arms, nor let beauties so bloomy
To one frigid owner be tied;
Your prudes may revile, and your old ones look
gloomy,
But, dearest! we’ve Law on our side.
Oh! think the delight of two lovers congenial,
Whom no dull decorums divide;
Their error how sweet, and their raptures how venial,
When once they’ve got Law on their side!
Tis a thing, that in every King’s reign has been
done, too;
Then why should it now be decried 1
If the Father has done it, why shouldn't the Son, toot
For so argues Law on our side!
And, ev*n should our sweet violation of duty
By cold-blooded jurors be tried,
They can but bring it in “ a misfortune,” my beauty,
As long as we’ve Law on our side.
THE LADY'S ANSWER.
Hold, hold, my good Sir! go a little more slowly;
For, grant me so faithless a bride,
Such sinners as we, are a little too lowly*
To hope to have Law on our side.
Had you been a great Prince, to whose star shining
, o'er 'em	-
The People should look for their guide,
'JThen your Highness, (and welcome!) might kick
down decorum—	.
You’d always have Law on your side.
Were you ev’n an old Marquis, in mischief grown
hoary,
Whose heart, though it long ago died
To the pleasures of vice, is alive to its glory—
You still would have Law on your side!
But for you, Sir, Crim. Con. is a path full of troubles;
By my advice therefore abide,
And leave the pursuit to those Princes and Nobles
Who have such a Law on their side!
FOR THE OPENING OF THE NEW THEATRE OF
ST. ST—PH—N, INTENDED TO HAVE BEEN
SPOKEN BY THE PROPRIETOR IN FULL COS-
TUME, ON THE 24TH OF NOVEMBER.
This day a New House, for your edification,
We open, most thinking and right-headed nation!
Excuse the materials—though rotten and bad,
They’re the best that for money just now could be
had;
And, if echo the charm of such houses should be,
You will find it shall echo my speech to a T.
As for actors, we’ve got the old Company yet,
The same motley, odd, tragi-comical set:
And consid’ring they all were but clerks t’other day,
It is truly surprising how well they can play.
Our Manager (he, who in Ulster was nurst,
And sung Erin go Brah for the galleries first,
But, on finding Pttf-interest a much better thing,
Chang’d his note of a sudden,to God> save the King;)
Still wise as he's blooming, and fat as he's clever,
Himself and his speeches as lengthy as ever,
Here offers you still the full use of his breath,
Your devoted and long-winded proser till death!
You remember last season, when things went per-
verse on,
We had to engage (as a block to rehearse on,)
One Mr. V—NS—tt—t, a good sort of person,
Who's also employ’d for this season to play,
In “ Raising the Wind,” and “ the Devil to Pay.”
We expect too—at least we’ve been plotting and
planning—
To get that great actor from Liverpool, C—nn—ng ;
And, as at the Circus there’s nothing attracts,
Like a good single combat brought in ’twixt the acts,
If the Manager should, with the help of Sir
P—PH—M,
Get up new diversions, and C—NN—ng should
stop ’em,
Who knows but we’ll have to announce in the papers,
“ Grand fight—second time—with additional capers.”
Be your taste for the ludicrous, humdrum, or sad.
There is plenty of each in this House to be had;
Where our Manager ruleth, there weeping will be,
For a dead hand at tragedy always was he;
And there never was dealer in dagger and cup,
Who so smilingly got all his tragedies up.
His powers poor Ireland will never forget,
And the widows of Walcheren weep o’er them yet,
So much for the actors—for secret machinery,
Traps, and deceptions, and shifting of scenery,
Y—bm—th and Cum are the best we can find,
To transact all that trickery business behind.
The former's employ'd too to teach us French jigs,
Keep the whiskers in curl, and look after the wigs.
In taking my leave now, I've only to say
A few Seats in the House, not as yet sold away,
May be had of the Manager Pat C—stl—b—gh,
THE SALE OF THE TOOLS.
INSTRUMENTA REGNI.
Tacitus·
Here’s a choice set of Tools for you, Ge’mmen
and Ladies,
They’ll fit you quite handy, whatever your trade is;
(Except it be Cabinet-making—I doubt
In that delicate service they’re rather worn out;
Though their owner, bright youth! if he’d had his
own will,
Would haye bungled away with them joyously
. . still.)
You can see they’ve been pretty well hacked—and
.	alack!
What tool is there job after job will not hack?
Their edge is but dullish, it must be confess’d,
And their temper, like E--------nb'r-------h's, none of
the best,
But you’ll find them good hard-working Tools,
upon trying,
Wer’t but for their brass, they are well worth the
buying;
They’re famous for making blinds, sliders, and
screens,
And they’re, some of them, excellent turning
machines!
The first Tool Γ11 put up (they call it a Chancellor)
Heavy concern to both purchaser and seller—
Though made of pig iron, yet worthy of note 'tis,
Tis ready to melt at a half minute's notice.
Who bids? Gentle buyer! 'twill turn as thou
shapesjt— .
Twill make a good thumb-screw ίο torture a Papist;
Or else a cramp-iron, to stick in the wall
Of some church that old women are fearful will fall;
Or better, perhaps, (for I'm guessing at random,)
A heavy drag-chain for some Lawyer's old Tandem!
Will nobody bid ? It is cheap, I am sure, Sir—
Once, twice, going, going, thrice, gone!—it is*
your's, Sir.
To pay ready money you sha’n’t be distrest.
As a bill at long date suits the Chancellor best.
Come, where's the next Tool?—Oh! His here in a
trice—
This implement, Ge'mmen! at first was a Vice;
(A tenacious and close sort of tool, that will let
Nothing out of its grasp it once happens to get,)
But it since has received a new coating of Tin,
Bright enough for a Prince to behold himself in!
Come, what shall we say for it? briskly! bid on,
Well the sooner get rid of it—going—quite gone!
God be with it, such tools, if not quickly knock’d
down,
Might at last cost their owner—how much? why, a
Crown !
The next Tool I'll set up has hardly had handsel or
Trial as yet, and is also a Chancellor— ,
Such dull things as these should be sold by the gross -r
Yet, dull as it is, 'twill be found to shave close,
And like other close shavers, some courage to gather,
This blade first began by a flourish on leather!
You shall have it for nothing—then, marvel with me
At the terrible tinkering work there must be,
Where a Tool such as this is (I’U leave you to
judge it)
Is placed by ill luck at the top of the Budget!
APPENDIX.
APPENDIX
Letter IV. Page 16.
Among the papers, enclosed in Dr. D—G—N—N’s
Letter, there is an Heroic Epistle in Latin verse,
from Pope Joan to her Lover, of which, as it is
rather a curious document, I shall venture to give
some account. This female Pontiff was a native
of England (or, according to others, of Germany)
who, at an early age, disguised herself in male
attire, and followed her lover, a young ecclesiastic,
to Athens, where she studied with such effect, that,
upon her arrival at Rome, she was thought worthy
of being raised to the Pontificate. This Epistle is
addressed to her Lover, (whom she had elevated
to the dignity of Cardinal) soon after the fatal
accouchement, by which her Fallibility was be-
trayed.
She begins by reminding him very tenderly of
the time, when they were in Athens—when
" by Ilissus’ stream
“ We whispering walk’d along, and leara’d to
speak
“ The tenderest feelings in the purest Greek!—
“ Ah! then how little did we think or hope,
“ Dearest of men! that I should e’er be Pope*!
“ That I—the humble Joan—whose house-wife art
“ Seem’d just enough to keep thy house and heart,
“ (And those alas! at sixes and at sevens)
“ Should soon keep all the keys of all the Heavens!”
*	Spanheim attributes the unanimity, with which Joan
was elected, to that innate and irresistible charm, by which
her sex, though latent, operated upon the instinct of the
Cardinals—“ Non vi aliqu&, sed concorditer, omnimn k> se
converso desiderio, quae sunt blandientis sexui arte·, la-
tentes in h&c quanquam!”	.
Still lees (she continues to say) could they have
foreseen, that such a catastrophe as had happened
in Council would befall them—that she
“ Should thus surprise the Conclave’s grave de-
corum,
" And let a little Pope pop out before 'em—
“ Pope Innocent! alas,’ the only one
“ That name should ever have been fix'd upon!"
She then very pathetically laments the downfall
of her greatness, and enumerates the various trea-
sures, to which she is doomed to bid farewell for
ever.
“ But oh! more dear, more precious ten times
over—
u Farewell my Lord, my Cardinal, my Lover!
“ I made thee Cardinal—thou mad’st me—ah!
“ Thou mad’st the Papa* of the World Mammal"
*	This is an anachronism, for it was not till the eleventh
Centnry, that the Bishop of Rome took the title of Papa
«r Universal Father.
*	I have not time now to translate any more of
this Epistle; but I presume the argument which
the Right Hon. Doctor and his friends mean to
deduce from it, is (in their usual convincing strain)
that Romanists must be unworthy of Emancipation
now, because they had a Petticoat Pope in the
Ninth Century—Nothing can be more logically
clear, and I find that Horace had exactly the same
views upon the subject.
Romanus (eheu posteri negabitis!)
Emancipatus Fceminje
Fert vallum !——r
Letter VII. Page 33.
The Manuscript, which I found in the Bookseller’s
Letter, is a Melo-Drama, in two Acts, entitled
u The Book V' of which the Theatres, of course,
had had the refusal, before it was presented to
Messrs. L—ck—ngt—n and Co.—This rejected
Drama, however, possesses considerable merit, and
I shall take the liberty of laying a sketch of it
before my Readers.
•	There was a mysterious Book, in the 16th Century,
which employed all the anxious curiosity of the Learned of
that day—Every one spoke of it; many wrote against it;
though it does not appear that any body had ever seen it;
and indeed Grotius is of opinion that no such Book ever
existed. It was entitled “ Liber de tribus impostoribus.”
(See Morhof. Cap. de Libris damnatis)—Our more modern
mystery of “ the Book” resembles this in many particulars;
and, if the number of Lawyers employed in drawing it up
be stated correctly, a slight alteration of the title into
“ d tribus impostoribus” would produce a coincidence alto-
gether very remarkable.
The first Act opens in a very awful manner—
lime, three o'clock in the morning—Scene, the
Bourbon Chamber* in C—r—1—t—n House—
Enter the P------e R—G—τ solus—After a few
broken sentences, he thus exclaims
Away—Away—
Thou haunt’st my fancy so, thou devilish Book !
I meet thee—trace thee, wheresoe'er I look.
I see thy damned ink in Eld—n's brows—
I see thy foolscap on my H—rtf—d’s Spouse—
V—«-NS—TT—t’s head recalls thy leathern case,
And all thy blank-leaves stare from R—d—r’s
face!
While, turning here (laying his hand on his heart)
I find, ah wretched elf!
Thy List of dire Errata in myself.
(Walks the stage in considerable agitation)
Oh Roman Punch! oh potent Cura^oa!
Oh Mareschino! Mareschino oh!
•	The Chamber, I suppose, which was prepared for the
reception of the Bonrbons at the first Grand Fete, and
which was ornamented (all “ for the Deliverance of
Europe”) with fleurs~de-lys9
Delicious drams! why have you not the art
To kill this gnawing Bookworm in my heart!
He is here interrupted in his Soliloquy by perceiv-
ing some scribbled fragments of paper on the
ground, which he collects, and “ by the light of
two magnificent candelabras” discovers the follow-
ing unconnected words " Wife neglected—" the
Book’—“ Wrong Measures”—“ the Queen”—“ Mr.
Lambert?'—“ the R—G—T.”
Ha! treason in my House!—Curst words, that wither
My princely soul, (shaking the papers violently)
what Demon brought you hither 1
“ My Wife!”—“ the Book” too!—stay—a nearer
look—
(holding the fragments closer to the Candelabras)
Alas ! too plain, B, double Ο, K, Book—
Death and destruction!
He here rings all the bells, and a whole legion of
Valets enter—A scene of cursing and swearing
(very much in the German style) ensues, in the
course of which messengers are dispatched, in dif-
ferent directions, for the L—bd Ch—nc—ll—R,
the D—e of C—b—L—d, &c. &c.—The inter-
mediate time is filled up by another Soliloquy, at
the conclusion of which the aforesaid Personages
rush on alarmed—the D—E with his stays only
half-laced, and the Ch—nc—ll—B with his wig
thrown hastily over an old red night-cap, “ to
maintain the becoming splendor of his office*/*
The R—6—T produces the appalling fragments,
upon which the Ch—nc—ll—B breaks out into
exclamations of loyalty and tenderness, and relates
the following portentous dream.
*Tis scarcely two hours since
I had a fearful dream of thee, my P------------E!—
Methought I heard thee, midst a courtly crowd,
Say from thy throne of gold, in mandate loud,
, >
•	“ To enable the individual, who holds the office of
Chancellor, to maintain it in becoming splendor.” (a loud
laugh.)
Lord Castlereagh’s Speech upvn the Vice-
Chancellor'9 Bill.
** Worship my whiskers!*—(weeps) not a knee was
there
But bent and worshipped the Illustrious Pair,
That curl’d in conscious majesty! (pulls out his
handkerchief)—while cries
Of “ Whiskers, whiskers” shook the echoing
skies!—
Just in that glorious hour, methought, there came,
With looks of injur’d pride, a Princely Dame,
And a young maiden, clinging to her side,
As if she fear'd some tyrant would divide
The hearts that nature and affection tied!
The Matron came—within her right hand glow’d
A radiant torch; while from her left a load
Of Papers hung—(wipes his eyes)—collected in
her veil—
The venal evidence, the slanderous tale,
The wounding hint, the current lies that pass
From Post to Courier, form’d the motley mass;
Which, with disdain, before the Throne she
throws,
And lights the Pile beneath thy princely nose.
( weeps )
Heav’ns, how it blaz’d!—I'd ask no livelier fire,
(With animation) To roast a Papist by, my gracious
Sire!—
But ah! the Evidence—(weeps again) I mourn’d
to see—
Cast, as it burn’d, a deadly light on thee!
And Tales and Hints their random sparkles flung,
And hiss'd and crackled, like an old maid’s tongue;
While Post and Courier, faithful to their fame,
Made up in stink for what they lack’d in flame!
When, lo, ye Gods!—the fire, ascending brisker,
Now singes one, now lights the other whisker—
Ah! where was then the Sylpbid, that unfurls
Her fairy standard in defence of curb 1—
Throne, Whiskers, Wig soon vanish’d into smoke,
The watchman cried “ past One” and—I awoke.
Here his Lordship weeps more profusely than ever,
and the R—G—τ (who has been very much
agitated during the recital of the Dream) by a
movement as characteristic as that of Charles XII.
when he was shot, claps his hands to his whiskers
to feel if all be really safe. A Privy Council is
held—all the Servants, &c. are examined, and it
appears that a Tailor, who had come to measure
the R—G—T for a Dress (which takes three
whole pages of the best superfine clinquant in de-
scribing) was the only person, who had been in the
Bourbon Chamber during the day. It is, accord-
ingly, determined to seize the Tailor, and the
Council breaks up with a unanimous resolution to
be vigorous.
The commencement of the Second Act turn»
chiefly upon the Trial and Imprisonment of two
Brothers—but as this forms the under plot of the
Drama, I shall content myself with extracting
from it the following speech, which is addressed
to the two Brothers, as they “ exeunt severally" to
Prison.
Go to your prisons—though the air of Spring
No mountain coolness to your cheeks shall bring;
Though summer flowers shall pass unseen away,
And all your portion of the glorious day
May be some solitary beam that falls,
At mom or eve, upon your dreary walls—
Some beam that enters, trembling as if aw’d,
To tell how gay the young world laughs abroad!
Yet go—for thoughts, as blessed as the air
Of Spring or summer flowers, await you there;
Thoughts, such as He, who feasts his courtly crew
In rich conservatories, never knew!
Pure self-esteem—the smiles that light within—
The Zeal, whose circling charities begin
With the few lov’d-ones Heaven has plac’d it
near,
Nor cease, till all Mankind are in its sphere!—
The Pride, that suffers without vaunt or plea,
And the fresh Spirit, that can warble free,
Through prison-bars, its hymn to Liberty!
The Scene next changes to a Tailor’s Workshop,
and a fancifully-arranged groupe of these Artists is
discovered upon the Shop-board—-Their task evi-
dently of a royal nature, from the profusion of
gold-lace, frogs, &c. that lie about—They all rise
and come forward, while one of them sings the fol-
lowing Stanzas to the tune of “ Derry Down/'
My brave brother Tailors, come, straiten your knees;
For a moment, like gentlemen, stand up at ease,
While I sing of our P—E (and a fig for his railers)
The Shop-board’s delight! the Mecaenas of Tailors!
Derry down, down, down derry down.
Some monarchs take roundabout ways into note,
But His short cut to fame is—the cut of his coat!
Philip’s Son thought the World was too small for
his Soul,
While our R—g—t’s finds room in a lac’d button-
hole!
Derry down, &c.
Look through all Europe’s Kings—at least, those
who go loose—
Not a King of them all’s such a friend to the Goose.
So, God keep him increasing in size and renown,
Still the fattest and best-fitted P---e about town!
Derry down, See.
During the 49 Derry down” of this last verse, a
messenger from the S—c—t—y of S-------------e’s Office
rushes on, and the singer (who, luckily for the effect
of the scene, is the very Tailor suspected of the
mysterious fragments) is interrupted in the midst of
his laudatory exertions, and hurried away, to the
Ho small surprise and consternation of his com-
rades. The Plot now hastens rapidly in its deve-
lopement—the management of the Tailor's exami-
nation is highly skilful, and the alarm, which he is
made to betray, is natural without being ludicrous·
The explanation, too, which he finally gives is not
more simple than satisfactory· It appears that the
said fragments formed part of a self-exculpatory
note, which he had intended to send to Colonel
M‘M— —N upon subjects purely professional, and
the corresponding bits (which still lie luckily in his
pocket) being produced, and skilfully laid beside
the others, the following billet-doux is the satisfac-
tory result of their juxta-position.
Honor’d Colonel—my Wife, who’s the Queen of
all slatterns,
Neglected to put up the Book of new Patterns.
She sent the wrong Measures too—shamefully
wrong—
They’re the same us’d for poor Mr* Lambert,
when young;
But, bless you! they wouldn’t go half round the
R—g—T—	·	,
So, hope you’ll excuse your's, till death, most
obedient.
This fully explains the whole mystery—the R—G—τ
resumes his wonted smiles, and the Drama termi-
nates, as usual, to the satisfaction of all parties.
C. Whittingham, Goewell Street, London.