LALLA ROOKH.
In the eleventh year of the reign of Aurungzebe,
Abdalla, King of the Lesser Bucharia, a lineal de-
scendant from the Great Zingis, having abdicated the
throne in favour of his son, set out on a pilgrimage
to the Shrine of the Prophet; and, passing into India
through the delightful valley of Cashmere, rested for
& short time at Delhi on his way. He was entertained
by Aurungzebe in a style of magnificent hospitality,
worthy alike of the visitor and the host, and was
afterwards escorted with the same splendour to Surat,
where he embarked for Arabia. During the stay of
the Royal Pilgrim at Delhi, a marriage was agreed
upon between the Prince, his son, and the youngest
daughter of the Emperor, Lalla Rookh1; — a Princess
described by the poets of her time, as more beautiful
than Leila, Shirine, Dewilde, or any of those heroines
‘ Tulip cheek.
whose names and loves embellish the songs of Persia
and Hindostan. It was intended that the nuptials
should be celebrated at Cashmere; where the young
King, as soon as the cares of empire would permit,
was to meet, for the first time, his lovely bride, and,
after a few months* repose in that enchanting valley,
conduct her over the snowy hills into Bucharia.
The day of Lalla Rookh’s departure from Delhi
was as splendid as sunshine and pageantry could make
it. The bazaars and baths were all covered with the
richest tapestry; hundreds of gilded barges upon the
Jumna floated with their banners shining in the water;
-	while through the streets groups of beautiful children
went strewing the most delicious flowers around, as in
that Persian festival called the Scattering of the Roses *;
till every part of the city was as fragrant as if a caravan
of musk from Khoten had passed through it. The
Princess, having taken leave of her kind father, who
at parting hung a cornelian of Yemen round her neck,
on which was inscribed a verse from the Koran, — and
having sent a considerable present to the Fakirs, who
*	Gul Reazee.
kept up the Perpetual Lamp in her sister’s tomb»
meekly ascended the palankeen prepared for her; and,
while Aurungzebe stood to take a last look from his
balcony, the procession moved slowly on the road
to Lahore.
Seldom had the Eastern world seen a cavalcade so
superb. From the gardens in the suburbs to the Impe-
rial palace, it was one unbroken line of splendour. The
gallant appearance of the Rajas and Mogul lords,
distinguished by those insignia of the Emperor’s favour,
the feathers of the egret of Cashmere in their turbans,
and the small silver-rimmed kettle-drums at the bows of
their saddles; — the costly armour of their cavaliers, who
vied, on this occasion, with the guards of the great Keder
Khan, in the brightness of their silver battle-axes and
the massiness of their maces of gold ; — the glittering of
the gilt pine-apples on the tops of the palankeens; — the
embroidered trappings of the elephants, bearing on their
backs small turrets, in the shape of little antique tem-
ples, within which the ladies of Lalla Rookh lay,
as it were, enshrined; — the rose-coloured veils of the
Princess’s own sumptuous litter, at the front of which a
fair young female slave sat fanning her through the
curtains, with feathers of the Argus pheasant’s wing;
—	and the lovely troop of Tartarian and Cashme-
rian maids of honour, whom the young King had sent to
accompany his bride, and who rode on each side of the
litter, upon small Arabian horses ; — all was brilliant,
tasteful, and magnificent, and pleased even the critical
and fastidious Fadladeen, Great Nazir or Chamberlain
of the Haram, who was borne in his palankeen imme-
diately after the Princess, and considered himself not
the least important personage of the pageant.
Fadladeen was a judge of every thing, — from the
penciling of a Circassian’s eye-lids to the deepest ques-
tions of science and literature; from the mixture of a
conserve of rose-leaves to the composition of an epic
poem: and such influence'had his opinion upon the
various tastes of the day, that all the cooks and poets of
Delhi stood in awe of him. His political conduct and
opinions were founded upon that line of Sadi, — “ Should
the Prince at noon-day say, It is night, declare that you
behold the moon and stars.” — And his zeal for religion,
of which Aurungzebe was a munificent protector, was
about as disinterested as that of the goldsmith, who fell
in love with the diamond eyes of the idol of Jaghemaut.
During the first days of their journey, Lalla Rookh,
who had passed all her life within the shadow of the
Royal Gardens of Shalimar, found enough in the beauty
of the scenery through which they passed to interest her
mind and delight her imagination ; and when, at evening
or in the heat of the day, they turned off from the high
road to those retired and romantic places which had been
selected for her encampments,—sometimes on the banks
of a small rivulet, as clear as the waters of the Lake of
Pearl; sometimes under the sacred shade of a Banyan
tree, from which the view opened upon a glade covered
with antelopes; and often in those hidden, embow-
ered spots, described by one from the Isles of the
West, as “ places of melancholy, delight, and safety,
where all the company around was wild peacocks and
turtle-doves ;” — she felt a charm in these scenes,' so
lovely and so new to her, which, for a time, made her
indifferent to every other amusement. But Lalla
Rookh was young, and the young love variety; nor
could the conversation of her ladies and the Great
Chamberlain, Fadladeen, (the only persons, of course,
admitted to her pavilion,) sufficiently enliven those many
vacant hours, which were devoted neither to the pillow
nor the palankeen. There was a little Persian slave,
who sung sweetly to the Vina, and who, now and then,
lulled the Princess to sleep with the ancient ditties of her
country, about the loves of Wamak and Ezra, the fair-
haired Zal and his mistress Rodahver ; not forgetting
the combat of Rustam with the terrible White Demon.
At other times she was amused by those graceful
dancing-girls of Delhi, who had been permitted by the
Bramins of the Great Pagoda to attend her, much to
the horror of the good Mussulman, Fadladeen, who
could see nothing graceful or agreeable in idolaters, and
to whom the very tinkling of their golden anklets was
an abomination.
But these and many other diversions were repeated
till they lost all their charm, and the nights and noon-
days were beginning to move heavily, when, at length,
it was recollected that, among the attendants sent by the
bridegroom, was a young poet of Cashmere, much cele-
brated throughout the Valley for his manner of reciting
the Stories of the East, on whom his Royal Master had
conferred the privilege of being admitted to the pavilion
of the Princess, that he might help to beguile the te-
diousness of the journey by some of his most agreeable
recitals. At the mention of a poet, Fadladeen elevated
his critical eye-brows, and, having refreshed his facul-
ties with a dose of that delicious opium, which is distilled
from the black poppy of the Thebais, gave orders for the
minstrel to be forthwith introduced into the presence;
The Princess, who had once in her life seen a poet
from behind the screens of gauze in her Father’s hall,
and had conceived from that specimen no very favourable
ideas of the Cast, expected but little in this new exhi-
bition to interest her; — she felt inclined however to
alter her opinion on the very first appearance of Fbba-
morz. He was a youth about Lalla Rookh’s own age,
and graceful as that idol of women, Crishna,3 — such
as he appears to their young imaginations, heroic,
beautiful, breathing music from his very eyes, and ex-
alting the religion of his worshippers into love. His
dress was simple, yet not without some marks of cost-
liness, and the ladies of the Princess were not knag in
3	The Indian Apollo.
discovering that the cloth, which encircled his high
Tartarian cap, was of the most delicate kind that the
ehawl-goats of Tibet supply. Here and there, too, over
his vest, which was confined by a flowered girdle of
Kashan, hung strings of fine pearl, disposed with an
air of studied negligence; — nor did the exquisite em-
broidery of his sandals escape the observation of these
fair critics ; who, however they might give way to
Fadladeen upon the unimportant topics of religion and
government, had the spirit of martyrs in every thing
relating to such momentous matters as jewels and
embroidery.
For the purpose of relieving the pauses of recitation
by music, the young Cashmerian held in his hand a
kitar; — such as, in old times, the Arab maids of the
West used to listen to by moonlight in the gardens of
the Alhambra, — and, having premised, with much
humility, that the story he was about to relate was
founded on % the adventures of that Veiled Prophet of
Khorassan, who, in the year of the Hegira 163, created
such alarm throughout the Eastern Empire, made an
obeisance to the Princess, and thus began : —
THE
VEILED PROPHET OF KHORASSAN.'
IN that delightful Province of the Sun,
The first of Persian lands he shines upon,
Where, all the loveliest children of his beam,
Flowrets and fruits blush over every stream,
And, fairest of all streams, the Murga roves
Among Mebou’s* bright palaces and groves; —
There, on that throne, to which the blind belief
Of millions rais'd him, sat the Prophet-Chief,
1 Khoraesan signifies, in the old Persian language, Province, or
Region of the Sun. — Sir W. Jones.
*	One of the royal cities of Khoraesan.
The Great Mokanna. O’er his features hung
The Veil, the Silver Veil, which he had flung
In mercy there, to hide from mortal sight
His dazzling brow, till man could bear its light.
For, far less luminous, his votaries said,
Were ev’n the gleams, miraculously shed
O’er Moussa’s3 cheek, when down the Mount he trod,
All glowing from the presence of his God!
On either side, with ready hearts and hands,
His chosen guard of bold Believers stands ;
Young, fire-eyed disputants, who deem their swords,
On points of faith, more eloquent than words;
And such their zeal, there’s not a youth with brand
Uplifted there, but, at the Chief’s command,
Would make his own devoted heart its sheath,
And bless the lips that doom’d so dear a death !
In hatred to the Caliph’s hue of night,4
Their vesture, helms and all, is snowy white;
3	Moses.
4	Black was the colour adopted by the Caliphs of the House of
Abbas, in their garments, turbans, and standards.
Their weapons various ; — some equipp’d, for speed,
With javelins of the light Kathaian reed;
Or bows of buffalo horn, and shining quivers
Fill’d with the stems* that bloom on Iran’s rivers;
While some, for war’s more terrible attacks,
Wield the huge mace and ponderous battle-axe,
And, as they wave aloft in morning’s beam
The milk-white plumage of their helms, they seem
Like a chenar-tree grove, when winter throws
O’er all its tufted heads his feathering snows.
Between the porphyry pillars, that uphold
The rich moresque-work of the roof of gold,
Aloft the Haram’s curtain’d galleries rise,
Where, through the silken net-work, glancing eyes,
From time to time, like sudden gleams that glow
Through autumn clouds, shine o’er the pomp below. —
What impious tongue, ye blushing saints, would dare
To hint that aught but Heav’n hath plac’d you there ?
Or that the loves of this light world could bind,
In their gross chain, your Prophet’s soaring mind?
s Pichula, used anciently for arrows by the Persians,
No—wrongful thought! —commission'd from above
To people Eden's bowers with shapes of love,
(Creatures so bright, that the same lips and eyes
They wear on earth will serve in Paradise;)
There to recline among heav’n’s native maids.
And crown the' Elect with bliss that never fades! —
Well hath the Prophet-Chief his bidding done;
And every beauteous race beneath the sun,
From those who kneel at Brahma's burning founts,6
To the fresh nymphs bounding o’er Yemen's mounts;
From Persia’s eyes of full and fawn-like ray,
To the small, half-shut glances of Kathay;
And Georgia's bloom, and Azar's darker smiles,
And the gold ringlets of the Western Isles;
All, all are there; — each Land its flower hath given,
To form that fair young Nursery for Heaven !
But why this pageant now? this arm'd array?
What triumph crowds the rich Divan to-day
*	The burning fountains of Brahma near Chittogong, esteemed as
holy. — Turner.
With turban’d heads, of every hue and rate,
Bowing before that veil’d and awful face,
Like tulip-beds, of different shape and dyes,
Bending beneath th’ invisible West-wind’s sighs!
What new-made mystery now, for FaW* to sign,
And blood to seal, as genuine and divine, —
What dazzling mtaiickry Qf God’s own power
Hath the bold Prophet plann’d to grace this hour ?
Not such the pageant now, though not less proud, —
Yon warrior youth, advancing from the crowd,
With silver bow, with belt of broider’d crape,
And fiirrbound bonnet of Bucharian shape,
So fiercely beautiful in form and eye,
Like war’s wild planet in a summer sky; —
That youth to-day, — a proselyte, worth hordes
Of cooler spirits and less practis’d swords, —
Is come to join, all bravery and belief,
The creed and standard of the heav’n-sent Chief.
Though few his years, the West already knows
Young Azim’s fame; — beyond th* Olympian snows,
Ere manhood darken’d o’er his downy cheek,
O’erwhelm’d in fight and captive to the Greek,»
He linger’d there, till peace dissolv’d his chains; —
Oh! who could, ev’n in bondage, tread the plains
Of glorious Gtref.ce, nor feel his spirit rise
Kindling within him? who, with heart and eyes,
Could walk where Liberty had been, nor 8ee
The shining foot-prints of her Deity,
Nor feel those god-like breathings in the air,
Which mutely told her spirit had been there?
Not he, that youthful warrior, — no, too well
For his soul’s quiet work’d the awakening spell;
And now, returning to his own dear land,
Full of those dreams of good that, vainly grand,
Haunt the young heart; — proud views of human-kind,
Of men to Gods exalted and refin’d; —
False views, like that horizon’s fair deceit,
Where earth and heav’n but seem, alas, to meet!—
Soon as he heard an Arm Divine was rais’d
To right the nations, and beheld, emblaz’d
7 In the war of the Caliph Mahadi against the Empress Irene, for
an account of which v. Gibbon, vol. x.
On the white flag Mokanna’s host unfurl’d,
Those words of sunshine, “ Freedom to the World,”
At once his faith, his sword, his soul obey’d
Th’ inspiring summons; every chosen blade,
That foughfc beneath that banner’s sacred text,
Seem’d doubly edg’d, for this world and the next;
And ne’er did Faith with her smooth bandage bind
Eyes more devoutly willing to be blind,
In virtue’s cause; — never was soul inspir’d
With livelier trust in what it most desir’d,
Than his, th’ enthusiast there, who kneeling, pale
With pious awe, before that Silver Veil,
Believes the form, to which he bends his knee,
Some pure, redeeming angel, sent to free
This fetter’d, world from every bond and stain,
And bring its primal glories back again!
*
Low as young Azim knelt, that motly crowd
Of all earth’s nations sunk the knee and bow’d,
With shouts of “ Alla!” echoing long and loud;
While high in air, above the Prophet’s head,
Hundreds of banners, to the sunbeam spread,
Wav’d, like the wings of the white birds that fan
The flying throne of star-taught Soliman !
Then thus he spoke; — “ Stranger, though new the frame
“ Thy soul inhabits now, I’ve track’d its flame
“ For many an age8, in every chance and change
“ Of that Existence, through whose varied range, —
“ As through a torch-race, where, from hand to hand
“ The flying youths transmit their shining brand, —
“ From frame to frame the unextinguish’d soul
“ Rapidly passes, till it reach the goal!
" Nor think ’tis only the gross Spirits, warm'd
“ With duskier fire and for earth’s medium form’d,
“ That run this course; — Beings, the most divine,
“ Thus deign through dark mortality to shine.
“ Such was the Essence that in Adam dwelt,
“ To which all Heav’n, except the Proud One, knelt: *
“ Such the refin’d Intelligence that glow’d
“ In Moussa’s frame; — and, thence descending, flow’d
•	The transmigration of souls was one of his doctrines, v. UHerbelot.
9 “ And when we said unto the angels, Worship Adam, they all
worshipped him except Eblis, (Lucifer,) who refused.”—The Karan,
Chap. ii.
“ Through many a Prophet’s breast; — in Issa shone,
“ And in Mohammed bum’d; till, hastening on,
“ (As a bright river that, from fall to fall
In many a maze descending, bright through all,
“ Finds some fair region where, each labyrinth past,
“ In one full lake of light it rests at last!)
“ That Holy Spirit, settling calm and free
“ From lapse or shadow, centers all in me!”
Again, throughout th’ assembly at these words,
Thousands of voices rung ; the warriors’ swords
Were pointed up to heav’n; a sudden wind
In the’ open banners play’d, and from behind
Those Persian hangings, that but ill could screen
The Haram’s loveliness, white hands were seen
Waving embroider’d scarves, whose motion gave	"I
A perfume forth; — like those the Houris wave,	>
When beckoning to their bowers th’ Immortal Brave. J
“ But these,” pursued the Chief, “ are truths sublime,
“ That claim a holier mood and calmer time
“ Than earth allows us now; — this sword must first
“ The darkling prison-house of Mankind burst,
“ Ere Peace can visit them, or Truth let in
“ Her wakening day-light on a world of sin!
“ But then» celestial warriors, then, when all
“ Earth’s shrines and thrones before our banner fall,
“ When the glad Slave shall at these feet lay down
“ His broken chain, the tyrant Lord his crown,
“ The Priest his book, the Conqueror his wreath,
“ And from the lips of Truth one mighty breath
“ Shall, like a whirlwind, scatter in its breeze
“ That whole dark pile of human mockeries; —
“ Then shall the reign of Mind commence on earth,
“ And starting fresh, as from a second birth,
“ Man, in the sunshine of the world’s new spring,
“ Shall walk transparent, like some holy thing!
“ Then too, your Prophet from his angel brow
“ Shall cast the veil, that hides its splendours now,
“ And gladden’d Earth shall, through her wide expanse,
“ Bask in the glories of this countenance!
“ For thee, young warrior, welcome! — thou hast yet
“ Some tasks to learn, some frailties to forget,
“ Ere the white war-plume o’er thy brow can wave; —
“ But,- once my own, mine all till in the grave!”
The Pomp is at an end, — the crowds are gone —'
Each ear and heart still haunted by the tone ►
Of that deep voice, which thrill’d like Alla’s own! >
The Young all dazzled by the plumes and lances,
The glittering throne, and Haram’s half-caught glances;
The Old deep pondering on the promis’d reign
Of peace and truth; and all the female train
Ready to risk their eyes, could they but gaze
A moment on that brow’s miraculous blaze!
But there was one, among the chosen maids
Who blush’d behind the gallery’s silken shades,
One, to whose soul the pageant of to-day
Has been like death; — you saw her pale dismay,
Ye wondering sisterhood, and heard the burst
Of exclamation from her lips, when first
She saw that youth, too well, too dearly known,
/
Silently kneeling at the Prophet’s throne.
Ah Zelica ! there was a time, when bliss
Shone o’er thy heart from every look of his;
When but to see him, hear him, breathe the air
In which he dwelt, was thy soul's fondest prayer!
When round him hung such a perpetual spell,
Whate'er he did, none ever did so well.
Too happy days! when, if he touch’d a flower
Or gem of thine, *twas sacred from that hour;
When thou did’st study him, till every tone
And gesture and dear look became thy own, —
Thy voice like his, the changes of his face
In thine reflected with still lovelier grace,
Like echo, sending back sweet music, fraught
With twice th* aerial sweetness it had brought!
Yet now he comes — brighter than even he
E’er beam’d before, — but ah! not bright for thee;
No — dread, unlook’d for, like a visitant
From the' other world, he comes as if to haunt
Thy guilty soul with dreams of lost delight,
Long lost to all but memory’s aching sight: —
Sad dreams! as when the Spirit of our Youth
Returns in sleep, sparkling with all the truth
And innocence once ours, and leads us back,
In mournful mockery, o'er the shining track
Of our young life, and points out every ray
Of hope and peace we’ve lost upon the way!
Once happy pair ! — in proud Bokhara's groves,
Who had not heard of their first youthful loves?
Bom by that ancient flood1, which from its spring
In the Dark Mountains swiftly wandering,
Enrich’d by every pilgrim brook that shines
With relics from Bucharia’s ruby mines,
And, lending to the Caspian half its strength,
In the cold Lake of Eagles sinks at length; —
There, on the banks of that bright river bom,
The flowers, that hung above its wave at mom,
Bless’d not the waters, as they murmur’d by,
With holier scent and lustre, than the sigh
And virgin glance of first affection cast
Upon their youth’s smooth current, as it pass’d!
But war disturb’d this vision — far away
From her fond eyes, summon’d to join th’ array
Of Persia’s warriors on the hills of Thrace,
\
The youth exchang’d his sylvan dwelling-place
1 The Amoo, which rises in the Belur Tag, or Dark Mountains,
and running nearly from east to west, splits into two branches, one
of which falls into the Caspian sea, and the other into Aral Nahr,
tit the Lake of Eagles.
For the rude tent and war-field’s deathful clash;
His Zelica’s sweet glances for the flash
Of Grecian wild-fire, and Love's gentle chains
For bleeding bondage on Byzantium's plains.
Month after month, in widowhood of soul
Drooping, the maiden saw two summers roll
Their suns away — but, ah ! how cold and dim
Ev’n summer suns, when not beheld with him!
From time to time ill omen’d rumours came,
(Like spirit-tongues, muttering the sick man’s name,
Just ere he dies, —) at length, those sounds of dread
Fell withering on her soul, “ Azim is dead !”—
Oh grief, beyond all other griefs, when fate
First leaves the young heart lone and desolate
In the wide world, without that only tie
For which it lov’d to live or fear’d to die ; —
Lorn as the hung-up lute, that ne’er hath spoken
Since the sad day its master-chord was broken!
Fond maid, the sorrow of her soul was such,
Ev’n reason sunk blighted beneath its touch;
And though, ere long, her sanguine spirit rose
Above the first dead pressure of its woes,
Though health and bloom return’d, the delicate chain
Of thought, once tangled, never clear’d again.
Warm, lively, soft as in youth’s happiest day,
The mind was still all there, but turn'd astray; —
A wandering bark, upon whose path-way shone
All stars of heav’n, except the guiding one!
Again she smil’d, nay, much and brightly smil’d,
But ’twas a lustre, strange, unreal, wild;
And when she sung to her lute's touching strain,
’Twas like the notes, half extacy, half pain,
The bulbul* utters, ere her soul depart,
When, vanquish'd by some minstrel’s powerful art,
>
She dies upon the lute whose sweetness broke her
heart!
Such was the mood in which that mission found
Young Zelica, — that mission, which around
The Eastern world, in every region blest
With woman’s smile, sought out its loveliest,
To grace that galaxy of lips and eyes,
Which the Veil’d Prophet destin’d for the skies! —
*	The nightingale.
And such quick welcome as a spark receives
Dropp’d on a bed of autumn’s wither’d leaves,
Did every tale of these enthusiasts find
In the wild maiden’s sorrow-blighted mind.
All fire at once the madd’ning zeal she caught; —
Elect of Paradise! blest, rapturous thought!
Predestin’d bride, in, heaven’s eternal dome,
Of some brave youth — ha! durst they say “ of some ?”
No — of the one, one only object trac’d
In her heart’s core too deep to be effac’d;
The one, whose memory, fresh as life, is twin’d
With every broken link of her lost mind;
Whose image lives, though Reason’s self be wreck'd,
Safe ’mid the ruins of her intellect!
Alas poor Zelica ! it needed all
The fantasy, which held thy mind in thrall,
To see in that gay Haram’s glowing maids
A sainted colony for Eden’s shades;
Or dream that he, — of whose unholy flame
Thou wert too soon the victim, — shining came
From Paradise, to people its pure sphere
With souls like thine, which he hath ruin’d here!
No — had not reason’s light totally set,
And left thee dark, thou had’st an amulet
In the lov'd image, graven on thy heart,
Which would have sav'd thee from the tempter’s art,
And kept alive, in all its bloom of breath,
That purity, whose fading is love’s death! —
But lost, inflam’d, — a restless zeal took place
Of the mild virgin’s still and feminine grace j —
First of the Prophet’s favourites, proudly first
In zeal and charms, — too well th’ Impostor nurs’d
Her soul’s delirium, in whose active flame,
Thus lighting up a young, luxuriant frame,
He saw more potent sorceries to bind
To his dark yoke the spirits of mankind,
More subtle chains than hell itself e’er twin'd.
No art was spar’d, no witchery; — all the skill
His demons taught him was employ'd to fill
Her mind with gloom and extacy by turns —
That gloom through which Frenzy but fiercer burns;
That extacy, which from the depth of sadness
Glares like the maniac's moon, whose light is madness!
’Twas from a brilliant banquet, where the sound
Of poesy and music breath’d around,
Together picturing to her mind and ear
The glories of that heav’n, her destin’d sphere,
Where all was pure, where every stain that lay
Upon the spirit’s light should pass away,
And, realizing more than youthful love
E’er wish’d or dream’d, she should for ever rove
Through fields of fragrance by her Azim’s side,
His own bless’d, purified, eternal bride! —
’Twas from a scene, a witching trance like this,
He hurried her away, yet breathing bliss,
To the dim charnel-house; — through all its steams
Of damp and death, led only by those gleams
Which foul Corruption lights, as with design
To show the gay and proud she too can shine! —
And, passing on through upright ranks of Dead,
Which to the maiden, doubly craz’d by dread,
Seem’d, through the bluish death-light round them cast,
To move their lips in mutterings as she pass’d —
There, in that awful place, when each had quaff’d
And pledg’d in silence such a fearful draught,
Such — oh! the look and taste of that red bowl
Will haunt her till she dies — he bound her soul
By a dark oath, in hell’s own language fram’d,
Never, while earth his mystic presience claim'd,
While the blue arch of day hung o’er them both,
Never, by that all-imprecating oath,
In joy or sorrow from his side to sever. —
She swore, and the wide charnel echoed, “ never, never!”
From that dread hour, entirely, wildly given
To him and — she believ’d, lost maid! — to heaven;
Her brain, her heart, her passions all inflam'd,
How proud she stood, when in full Haram nam'd
The Priestess of the Faith! —how flash'd her eyes
With light alas ! that was not of the skies,
When round, in trances only less than hers,
She saw the Haram kneel, her prostrate worshippers!
Well might Mokanna think that form alone
Had spells enough to make the world his own: —
Light, lovely limbs, to which the spirit's play
Gave motion, airy as the dancing spray,	►
When from its stem the small bird wings away !
Lips in whose rosy labyrinth, when she smil’d,
The soul was lost; and blushes, swift and wild
As are the momentary meteors sent
Across th’ uncalm, but beauteous firmament.
And then her look ! — oh! where’s the heart so wise,
Could unbewilder’d meet those matchless eyes ?
Quick, restless, strange, but exquisite withal,
Like those of angels, just before their fall;
Now shadow’d with the shames of earth — now crost
By glimpses of the Heav’n her heart had lost;
In every glance there broke, without controul,
The flashes of a bright but troubled soul,
Where sensibility still wildly play’d,
Like lightning, round the ruins it had made!
And such was now young Zelica — so chang’d
From her who, some years since, delighted rang’d
The almond groves, that shade Bokhara’s tide,
All life and bliss, with Azim. by her side!
So alter’d was she now, this festal day,
When, mid the proud Divan’s dazzling array,
The vision of that Youth, whom she had lov’d,
And wept as dead, before her breath’d and mov’d; —
When — bright» she thought, as if from Eden’s track
But half-way trodden, he had wander’d back
Again to earth, glistening with Eden’s light, —
Her beauteous Azim shone before her sight.
Oh Reason ! who shall say what spells renew,
When least we look for it, thy broken clew !
Through what small vistas o’er the darken’d brain
Thy intellectual day-beam bursts again ;
And how, like forts, to which beleaguerers win
Unhop’d-for entrance through some friend within,
One clear idea, wakened in the breast
By memory’s magic, lets in all the rest!
Would it were thus, unhappy girl, with thee !
But, though light came, it came but partially;
Enough to show the maze, in which thy sense
Wander’d about, — but not to guide it thence;
Enough to glimmer o’er the yawning-wave,
But not to point the harbour which might save.
«
Hours of delight and peace, long left behind,
With that dear form came rushing o’er her mind;
But oh! to think how deep her soul had gone
In shame and falsehood, since those moments shone;
And, then, her oath — there madness lay again,
And, shuddering, back she sunk into her chain
Of mental darkness, as if blest to flee
From light, whose every glimpse was agony!
Yet, one relief this glance of former years
Brought, mingled with its pain, — tears, floods of tears,
Long frozen at her heart, but now like rills
Let loose in spring-time from the snowy hills,
And gushing warm, after a sleep of frost,
Through valleys where their flow had long been lost!
Sad and subdued, for the first time her frame
Trembled with horror, when the summons came,
(A summons proud and rare, which all but she,
And she, till now, had heard with extacy,)
To meet Mokanna at his place of prayer,
A garden oratory, cool and fair,
By the stream’s side, where still at close of day,
The Prophet of the Veil retir’d to pray,
Sometimes alone — but, oftener far, with one,
One chosen nymph to share his orison.
Of late none found such favour in his sight
As the young Priestess ; and though, since that night
When the death-caverns echoed every tone
Of the dire oath that made her all his own,
Th’ Impostor, sure of his infatuate prize,
Had, more than once, thrown off his soul’s disguise,
And utter’d such unheav’nly, monstrous things,
As ev’n across the desperate wanderings
Of a weak intellect, whose lamp was out,
Threw startling shadows of dismay and doubt; —
Yet zeal, ambition, her tremendous vow,
The thought, still haunting her, of that bright brow
Whose blaze, as yet from mortal eye conceal’d,
Would soon, proud triumph! be to her reveal’d,
To her alone; — and then the hope, most dear,
Most wild of all, that her transgression here
Was but a passage through earth’s grosser fire,
From which the spirit would at last aspire?
Ev’n purer than before, — as perfumes rise
Through flame and smoke, most welcome to the skies —
And that when Azim’s fond, divine embrace,
Should circle her in heav’n, no dark’ning trace
Would on that bosom he once lov’d remain,
But all be bright, be pure, be his again! —
These were the wildering dreams, whose curst deceit'
Had chain'd her soul beneath the tempter’s feet,
And made her think ev'n damning falsehood sweet. -
But now that Shape, which had appall’d her view,
That Semblance — oh how terrible, if true ! —
Which came across her frenzy’s full career
With shock of consciousness, cold, deep, severe,
As when, in northern seas, at midnight dark,
An isle of ice encounters some swift bark,
And, startling all its wretches from their sleep,
By one cold impulse hurls them to the deep; —
So came that shock not frenzy’s self could bear, ^
And waking up each long-lull’d image there, >
But check’d her headlong soul, to sink it in despair! J
Wan and dejected, through the evening dusk,
She now went slowly to that small kiosk,
Where, pondering alone his impious schemes,
Mokanna waited her — too wrapt in dreams
Of the fair-ripening future's rich success,
To heed the sorrow, pale and spiritless,
That sat -upon his victim's downcast brow,
Or mark how slow her step, how alter’d now
From the quick, ardent Priestess, whose light bound
Came like a spirit’s o’er th’ unechoing ground, —
From that wild Zelica, whose every glance
Was thrilling fire, whose every thought a trance!
1 >.
Upon his couch the Veiled Mokanna lay,
While lamps around —- not such as lend their ray,
Glimmering and cold, to those who nightly pray,
In holy Koom', or Mecca’s dim arcades,
But brilliant, soft, such lights as lovely maids
Look loveliest in, shed their luxurious glow
Upon his mystic Veil’s white glittering flow.
Beside him, ’stead of beads and books of prayer,
Which the world fondly thought he mused on there,
Stood vases, filled with Kishmee’s* golden wine,
And the red weepings of the Shiraz vine;
Of which his curtain’d lips full many a draught
Took zealously, as if eac'h drop they quaff’d,
1 The cities of Com (or Koom) and Cashan are full of mosques,
mausoleums and sepulchres of the descendants of Ali, the Saints of
Persia. — Chardin.
*	An island in the Persian Gulf, celebrated for its white wine.
Like Zsmzem’s Spring of Holiness3, had power
To freshen the soul's virtues into flower!
And still he drank and ponder’d — nor could see
Th’ approaching maid, so deep his reverie;
At length, with fiendish laugh, like that which broke
From Eblis. at the Fall of Man, he spoke: —
“ Yes, ye vile race, for hell’s amusement given,
“ Too mean for earth, yet claiming kin with heaven;
“ God’s images, forsooth ! — such gods as he
« Whom India serves, the monkey deity4; —
“ Ye creatures of a breath, proud things of day,
“ To whom if Lucifer, as grandams say,
“ Refus’d, though at the forfeit of heaven’s light,
“ To bend in worship, Lucifer was right! —
“ *Soon shall I plant this foot upon the neck
“ Of your foul race, and without fear or check,
“ Luxuriating in hate, avenge my shame,
“ My deep-felt, long-nurst loathing of man’s name! —
<( Soon, at the head of myriads, blind and fierce
“ As hooded falcons, through the -universe
*	The miraculous well at Mecca; so called, says Sale, from the
murmuring of its waters.
*	The god Hannaman.
“ Fll sweep my darkening, desolating way,
“ Weak man my instrument, curst man my prey!
u Ye wise, ye leam’d, who grope your dull way on
“ By the dim twinkling gleams of ages gone,
“ Like superstitious thieves, who think the light
“ From dead men’s marrow guides them best at night5—
“ Ye shall have honours—wealth,—yes, Sages, yes —
“ I know, grave fools, your wisdom’s nothingness;
“ Undazzled it can track yon starry sphere,
“ But a gilt stick, a bauble blinds it here.
“ How I shall laugh, when trumpetted along,
“ In lying speech, and still more lying song,
“ By these learn’d slaves, the meanest of the throng;
“ Their wits bought up, their wisdom shrunk 80 email,
“ A sceptre’s puny point can wield it all!
“ Ye too, believers of incredible creeds,
“ Whose faith inshrines the monsters which it breeds ;
s A kind of lantern formerly used by robbers, called the Hand of
Glory, the candle for which was made of the fat of a dead malefactor.
This, however, was rather a western than an eastern superstition.
“ Who, bolder ev'n than Nemrod, think to rise,
M By nonsense heap’d on nonsense, to the skies j
“ Ye shall have miracles, aye, sound ones too,
“ Seen, heard, attested, every thing — but true.
“ Your preaching zealots, too inspir’d to seek
“ One grace of meaning for the things they speak j
“ Your martyrs, ready to shed out their blood,
“ For truths too heavenly to be understood;
“ And your State Priests, sole venders of the lore,
“ That works salvation; — as on Ava’s shore,
“ Where none but priests are privileg’d to trade
“ In that best marble of which Gods are made j6—
“ They shall have mysteries — aye, precious stuff
“ For knaves to thrive by — mysteries enough;
“ Dark, tangled doctrines, dark as fraud can weave,
“ Which simple votaries shall on trust receive,
** While craftier feign belief, till they believe.
** A Heav’n too ye must have, ye lords of dust, —
“ A splendid Paradise, — pure souls, ye must:
“ That Prophet ill sustains his holy call,
“ Who finds not Heav’ns to suit the tastes of all;
“ Houris for boys, omniscience for sages,
“ And wings and glories for all ranks and ages.
6	Symes’s Ava, vol. ii. p. 376.
“ Vain things ! — as lust or vanity inspires,
“ The Heav’n of each is but what each desires,
“ And, soul or sense, whate’er the object be,
“ Man would be man to all eternity!
“ So let him — Eblis ! grant this crowning curse,
“ But keep him what he is, no Hell were worse.”—
“ Oh my lost soul!” exclaim’d the shuddering maid, Ί
Whose ears had drunk like poison all he said; —	>
Mokanna started—not abash’d, afraid;—	J
He knew no more of fear than one who dwells
Beneath the tropics knows of icicles!
But, in those dismal words that reach’d his ear,
“ Oh my lost soul!” there wasVa sound so drear,
So like that voice, among the sinful dead,
In which the legend o’er Hell’s Gate is read,
That, new as ’twas from her, whom nought could dim
Or sink till now, it startled even him.
“ Ha, my fair Priestess!”— thus, with ready wile,
Th’ impostor turn’d to greet her — “ thou, whose smile
“ Hath inspiration in its rosy beam
“ Beyond th’ Enthusiast’s hope or Prophet’s dream!
“ Light of the Faith! who twin’st religion’s zeal
“ So close with love's, men know not which they feel,
“ Nor which to sigh for, in their trance of heart,
“ The Heav'n thou preachest or the Heav'n thou art!
“ What should I be without thee? without thee
“ How dull were power, how joyless victory!
“ Though borne by angels, if that smile of thine
“ Bless’d not my banner, ’twere but half divine.
“ But — why so mournful, child? those eyes, that shone
u All life last-night —what! —is their glory gone?
“ Come, come — this morn's fatigue hath made them
“ pale,
“ They want rekindling — suns themselves would fail,
“ Did not their comets bring, as I to thee,
“ From Light’s own fount supplies of brilliancy!
" Thou seest this cup — no juice of earth is here,
“ But the pure waters of that upper sphere,
“ Whose rills o'er ruby beds and topaz flow,
“ Catching the gem’s bright colour, as they go.
“ Nightly my Genii come and fill these urns —
“ Nay, drink — in every drop life’s essence bums;
M 'Twill make that soul all fire, those eyes all bright —
“ Come, come, I want thy loveliest smiles to-night:
There is a youth — why start?—thou saw’st him then;
Look’d he not nobly ? such the godlike men
Thou’lt have to woo thee in the bowers above; —
Though he, I fear, hath thoughts too stern for love,
Too rul’d by that cold enemy of bliss
The world calls virtue — we must conquer this; —
Nay, shrink not, pretty sage; ’tis not for thee
To scan the mazes of heav’n’s mystery.
The steel must pass through fire, ere it can yield
Fit instruments for mighty hands to wield.'
This very night I mean to try the art
Of powerful beauty on that warrior’s heart.
All that my Haram boasts of bloom and wit,
Of skill and charms, most rare and exquisite,
Shall tempt the boy; — young Mir^ala’s soft eyes,
Whose sleepy lid like snow on violets lies;
Arouya’s cheeks, warm as a spring-day sun,
And lips that, like the seal of Solomon,
Have magic in their pressure; Zeba’s lute,
And Lilla’s dancing feet, that gleam and shoot
Rapid and white as sea-birds o’er the deep! —
All shall combine their witching powers to steep
“ My convert's spirit in that softening trance,
“ From which to heav’n is but the next advance; —
“ That glowing, yielding fusion of the breast,
“ On which Religion stamps her image best.
“ But hear me, Priestess! — though each nymph of
“ these
“ Hath some peculiar, practis’d power to please,
\
“ Some glance or step which, at the mirror tried,
“ First charms herself, then all the world beside;
M There· still wants one, to make the victory sure,
“ One, who in every look joins every lure;
“ Through whom all beauty’s beams concenter’d pass,
“ Dazzling and rich, as through love’s burning-glass;
** Whose gentle lips persuade without a word,
“ Whose words, ev’n when unmeaning, are ador’d,
‘‘ Like inarticulate breathings from a shrine,
“ Which our faith takes for granted are divine!
M Such is the nymph we want, all warmth and light,
“ To crown the rich temptations of to-night;
“ Such the refin'd enchantress that must be
“ This hero’s vanquisher, — and thou art she!”
With her hands clasp’d, her lips apart and pale,
The maid had stood, gazing upon the Veil
From which these words, like south-winds through a
fence
Of Kerzrah flow’rs, came fill’d with pestilence:7
So boldly utter’d too! as if all dread
Of frowns from her, of virtuous frowns, were fled,
And the wretch felt assur’d that, once plung’d in,
Her woman’s soul would know no pause in sin!
At first, tho’ mute she listen’d, like a dream
Seem’d all he said; nor could her mind, whose beam ►
As yet was weak, penetrate half his scheme.
But when, at length, he uttered “ Thou art she !”
All flash’d at once, and, shrieking piteously,
u Oh not for worlds !” she cried — “ Great God ! to
“ whom
“ I once knelt innocent, is this my doom ?
“ Are all my dreams, my hopes of heavenly bliss,
“ My purity, my pride, then come to this,.—
“ To live, the wanton of a fiend ! to be
“ The pander of his guilt — oh infamy !
7	“ It is commonly said in Persia, that if a man breathe in the hot
south-wind, which in June or July passes over that flower (the Kerzereh)
it will kill him.” — Thevenot.
“ And sunk, myself, as low as hell can steep
“ In its hot flood, drag others down as deep !
“ Others ? — ha! yes—that youth who came to-day —
“ Not him I lov’d — not him — oh ! do but say, '
“ But swear to me this moment 'tis not he,
“ And I will serve, dark fiend! will worship even thee!”
“ Beware, young raving thing ! — in time beware,
“ Nor utter what I cannot, must not bear
“ Ev'n from thy lips. Go — try thy lute, thy voice,
“ The boy must feel their magic — I rejoice
« To see those fires, no matter whence they rise,
« Once more illuming my fair Priestess’ eyes;
“ And should the youth, whom soon those eyes shall
“ warm,
“ Indeed resemble thy dead lover’s form,
“ So much the happier wilt thou find thy doom, Ί
“ As one warm lover, full of life and bloom,	>
“ Excels ten thousand cold ones in the tomb.	J
“Nay, nay, no frowning, sweet!—those eyes were
“ made
“ For love, not anger — I must be obey’d.”
“ Obey'd ! — 'tis well — yes, I deserve it all —
On me, on me heaven’s vengeance cannot fall
Too heavily — but Azim, brave and true
And beautiful — must he be ruin’d too ?
Must he too, glorious as he is, be driven
A renegade like me from Love and Heaven ?
Like me ? — weak* wretch, I wrong him — not like
“ me ;
No — he’s all truth and strength and purity !
Fill up your madd’ning hell-cup to the brim,
Its witchery, fiends, will.have no charm for him.
Let loose your glowing wantons from their bowers,
He loves, he loves, and can defy their powers !
Wretch as I am, in his heart still I reign
Pure as when first we met, without a stain!
Though ruin’d — lost — my memory, like a charm
Left by the dead, still keeps his soul from harm.
Oh ! never let him know how deep the brow
He kiss’d at parting is dishonour’d now —
Ne’er tell him how debas’d, how sunk is she,
Whom once he lov’d — once ! — still loves dotingly !
Thou laugh’st, tormentor, — what! — thou’lt brand
“ my name ?
“ Do, do — in vain — he’ll not believe my shame —
“ He thinks me true, that nought beneath God’s sky
“ Could tempt or change me, and — so once thought I.
“ But this is past—though worse than death my lot,
“ Than hell — ’tis nothing, while he knows it not.
“ Far off to some benighted land I’ll fly,
“ Where sunbeam ne’er shall enter till I die ;
“ Where none will ask the lost one whence she came,
“ But I may fade and fall without a name !
“ And thou — curst man or fiend, whate’er thou art,
“ Who found’st this burning plague-spot in my heart,
“ Andspread’st it—oh,so quick!—thro’ soul andframe -
“ With more than demon’s art, till I became	►
" A loathsome thing, all pestilence, all flame! —
" If, when I’m gone---------”
“ Hold, fearless maniac, hold,
“ Nor tempt my rage — by Heav’n, not half so bold
“ The puny bird, that dares with teazing hum
“ Within the crocodile’s stretch’d jaws to come!8
8	The ancient story concerning the Trochilus, or humming-bird,
entering with impunity into the mouth of the crocodile, is firmly believed
at Java. — Barrow's Cochin-china.
“ And so, thou’lt fly, forsooth ? — what! — give up all
“ Thy chaste dominion in the Haram Hall,
“ Where now to Love and now to Alla given,
“ Half mistress and half saint, thou hang’st as even
M As doth Medina’s tomb, ’twixt hell and heaven !
“ Thou’lt fly ? — as easily may reptiles run
“ The gaunt snake once hath fix’d his eyes upon ;
“ As easily, when caught, the prey may be
“ Pluck’d from his loving folds, as thou from me.
“ No, no, *tis fix’d — let good or ill betide,
“ Thou’rt mine till death, till death Mokanna’s bride !
“ Hast thou forgot thy oath ?” —
At this dread word,
The Maid, whose spirit his rude taunts had stirr’d
Through all its depths, and rous’d an anger there,
That burst and lighten’d ev’n through her despair ! —
Shrunk back, as if a blight were in the breath,
That spoke that word, and stagger’d, pale as death.
“ Yes, my sworn Bride, let others seek in bowers
“ Their bridal place — the charnel vault was ours!
“ Instead of scents and balms, for thee and me
“ Rose the rich steams of sweet mortality j —
“ Gay, flickering death-lights shone while we were wed,
“ And, for our guests, a row of goodly Dead,
“ (Immortal spirits in their time no doubt,)
“ From reeking shrouds upon the rite look’d out!
“ That oath thou heardst more lips than thine repeat —·
“ That cup — thou shudderest, Lady — was it sweet ?
“ That cup we pledg’d, the charnel’s choicest wine,
“ Hath bound thee — aye — body and soul all mine!
“ Bound thee by chains that, whether blest or curst
w No matter now, not hell itself shall burst!
“ Hence, woman, to the Haram, and look gay,
l< Look wild, look — any thing but sad; yet stay —-
“ One moment more — from what this night hath pass’d,
“ I see thou know’st me, know’st me well at last.
“ Ha! ha! and so, fond thing, thou thought’st all true,
“ And that I love mankind ! — I do, I do —
“ As victims, love them ; as the sea-dog dotes
“ Upon the small, sweet fry that round him floats;
“ Or, as the Nile-bird loves the slime that gives
That rank and venomous food on which she lives !9 —
9 Circum easdem ripas (Nili, viz.) ales est Ibis. Ea serpentium popu-
latur ova, gratissimamque ex his escam nidis suis refert — Solinus.
“ And, now thou see’st my soul*s angelic hue,
“ ’Tis time these features were uncurtain'd too ; —
“This brow, whose light — oh rare, celestial light !
“ Hath been reserv’d to bless thy favour’d sight;
“ These dazzling eyes, before whose shrouded might
“ Thou’st seen immortal Man kneel down and quake —
“ Would that they were heaven’s lightnings for his sake!
“ But turn and look — then wonder, if thou wilt,
“ That I should hate, should take revenge, by guilt,
“ Upon the hand, whose mischief or whose mirth
“ Sent me thus maim’d and monstrous upon earth ;
“ And on that race who, though more vile they be
“ Than mowing apes, are demi-gods to me !
“ Here —judge if Hell, with all its power to damn,
“ Can add one curse to the foul thing I am !” —
He rais’d his veil — the Maid turn’d slowly round,
Look’d at him — shriek’d — and sunk upon the ground!
On their arrival, next night, at the place of encamp-
ment, they were surprised and delighted to find
the groves all round illuminated; some artists of
Yamtcheou having been sent on previously for the
purpose. On each side of the green alley, which led
to the Royal Pavilion, artificial sceneries of bamboo-
work were erected, representing arches, minarets and
towers, from which hung thousands of silken lanterns,
painted by the most delicate pencils of Canton. —
Nothing could be more beautiful than the leaves of
the mango-trees and acacias, shining in the light of
the bamboo scenery, which shed a lustre round as
soft as that of the nights of Peristan.
Lalla Rookh, however, who was too much occupied
by the sad story of Zelica and her lover, to give a
thought to any thing else, except, perhaps, him who
related it, hurried on through this scene of splendour
to her pavilion, greatly to the mortification of the poor
artists of Yamtcheou, and was followed with equal ra-
pidity by the Great Chamberlain, cursing, as he went,
that ancient Mandarin whose parental anxiety in lighting
up the shores of the lake where his beloved daughter
had wandered and had been lost, was the origin of
these fantastic Chinese illuminations.
Without a moment’s delay young Feramorz was
introduced, and Fadladeen, who could never make up
his mind as to the merits of a poet, till he knew the
religious sect to which he belonged, was about to ask
him whether he was a Shia or a Sooni, when Lalla
Rookh impatiently clapped her hands for silence, and
the youth, being seated upon the musnud near her,
proceeded; —
Prepare thy soul, young Azim! —thou hast brav’d
The bands of Greece, still mighty though enslav’d;
Hast fac’d her phalanx, arm'd with all its fame,
Her Macedonian pikes and globes of flame;
All this hast fronted, with firm heart and brow,
But a more perilous trial waits thee now, —
Woman’s bright eyes, a dazzling host of eyes
From every land where woman smiles or sighs;
Of every hue, as Love may chance to raise
His black or azure banner in their blaze;
And each sweet mode of warfare, from the flash
That lightens boldly through the shadowy lash,
To the sly, stealing splendors, almost hid,
Like swords half-sheath’d, beneath the downcast lid.
Such, Azim, is the lovely, luminous host
Now led against thee; and, let conquerors boast
Their fields of fame, he who in virtue arms
A young, warm spirit against beauty’s charms,
Who feels her brightness, yet defies her thrall,
Is the best, bravest conqueror of them all.
Now, through the Haram chambers, moving lights
And busy shapes proclaim the toilet’s rites; —
From room to room the ready handmaids hie,
Some skill’d to wreath the turban tastefully,
Or hang the veil, in negligence of shade,
O’er the warm blushes of the youthful maid,
Who, if between the folds but one eye shone,
Like Seba’s Queen could vanquish with that one:1 —
While some bring leaves of Henna, to imbue
The fingers’ ends with a bright roseate hue, *
So bright, that in the mirror’s depth they seem
Like tips of coral branches in the stream;
And others mix the Kohol’s jetty dye,
To give that long, dark languish to the eye,3
Which makes the maids, whom kings are proud to cull
From fair Circassia’s vales, so beautiful!
All is in motion; rings and plumes and pearls
Are shining every where: — some younger girls
1 w Thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes.”—Sol. Song.
*	“ They tinged the ends of her fingers scarlet with Henna, so that
they resembled branches of coral.” — Story of Prince Futtim in Ba-
hardanush.
3	The women black the inside of their eyelids with a powder named
the black KohoL — Russel.
Are gone by moonlight to the garden beds»
To gather fresh, cool chaplets for their heads;
Gay creatures! sweet, though mournful ’tis to see
How each prefers a garland from that tree
Which brings to mind her childhood’s innocent day,
And the dear fields and friendships far away.
The maid of India, blest again to hold
In her full lap the Champac’s leaves of gold, 4
Thinks of the time when, by the Ganges’ flood,
Her little play-mates scatter’d many a bud
Upon her long black hair, with glossy gleam
Just dripping from the consecrated stream ;
While the young Arab, haunted by the smell
Of her own mountain flowers, as by a spell, —
The sweet Elcaya5, and that courteous tree
Which bows to all who seek its canopy 6 —
4	“ The appearance of the blossoms of the gold-coloured Campac on
the black hair of the Indian women, has supplied the Sanscrit Poets
with many elegant allusions.” — v. Asiatic Researches, vol. iv.
i A tree famous for its perfume, and common on the hills of Yemen.
— Niebuhr.
6	Of the genus mimosa, iC which droops its branches whenever any
person approaches it, seeming as if it saluted those who retire under
its shade.” — Niebuhr.
Sees, call’d up round her by these magic scents.
The well, the camels, and her father’s tents;
Sighs for the home she left with little pain,
And wishes ev’n its sorrows back again !
Meanwhile, through vast illuminated halls,
Silent and bright, where nothing but the falls
Of fragrant waters, gushing with cool sound
From many a jasper fount is heard around,
Young Azim roams bewilder’d, — nor can guess
What means this maze of light and loneliness.
Here, the way leads, o’er tesselated floors
Or mats of Cairo, through long corridors,
Where, rang’d in cassolets and silver urns,
Sweet wood of aloe or of sandal burns’;
And spicy rods, such as illume at night
The bowers of Tibet 7, send forth odorous light,
Like Peris’ wands, when pointing out the road
For some pure Spirit to its blest abode! —
7	<{ Cloves are a principal ingredient in the 'composition of the
perfumed rods, which men of rank keep constantly burning in their
presence.” — Turners Tibet.
And here, at once, the glittering saloon
Bursts on his sight, boundless and bright as noon;
Where, in the midst, reflecting back the rays
In broken rainbows, a fresh fountain plays
High as th’ enamell’d cupola, which towers
All rich with Arabesques of gold and flowers:
And the mosaic floor beneath shines through
The sprinkling of that fountain’s silvery dew,
Like the wet, glistening shells, of every dye,
That on the margin of the Red Sea lie.
Here too he traces the kind visitings
Of woman’s love in those fair, living things
, Of land and wave, whose fate, — in bondage thrown
For their weak loveliness — is like her own!
On one side gleaming with a sudden grace
Through water, brilliant as the crystal vase
In which it undulates, small fishes shine,
Like golden ingots from a fairy mine j —
While, on the other, lattic’d lightly in
With odoriferous woods of Comorin, 8
*	C'est d’oii vient le bois d’aloee, que lee Arabes appellent Oud Co-
mari, et celui du sandal, qui s’y trouve en grande quantite. — UHerbelat.
Each brilliant bird that wings the air is seen; —
Gay, sparkling loories, such as gleam between
The crimson blossoms of the coral tree 9
In the warm isles of India’s sunny sea :
Mecca’s blue sacred pigeon', and the thrush
Of Hindostan*, whose holy warblings gush,
At evening, from the tall pagoda’s top ; —
Those golden birds that, in the spice-time, drop
About the gardens, drunk with that sweet food
Whose scent hath lur’d them o’er the summer
flood;3 —
9	“ Thousands of variegated loories visit the coral-trees.” — Barrens.
1 “In Mecca there are quantities of blue pigeons, which none will
affright or abuse, much less kill.” — Pitfs Account of the Mahometans.
*	“ The Pagoda Thrush is esteemed among the first choristers of India.
It sits perched on the sacred Pagodas, and from thence delivers its melo-
dious song.”—Pennant’s Hindostan.
*	Birds of Paradise, which, at the nutmeg season, come in flights
from the southern isles to India, and “ the strength of the nutmeg,”
says Tavemier, “so intoxicates them that they fall dead drunk to the
earth.”
And those that under Araby’s soft sun
Build their high nests of budding cinnamon. 4
In short, all rare and beauteous things, that fly
Through the pure element, here calmly lie
Sleeping in light, like the green birds 5 that dwell
In Eden’s radiant fields of asphodel!
So on, through scenes past all imagining, —
More like the luxuries of that impious King, *
Whom Death’s dark Angel, with his lightning torch,
Struck down and blasted ev’n in Pleasure’s porch,
Than the pure dwelling of a Prophet, sent,
Arm’d with Heav’n’s sword, forman’s enfranchisement—
Young Azim wander’d, looking sternly round,
His simple garb and war-boots’ clanking sound
But ill according with the pomp and grace
And silent lull of that voluptuous place !
4	“ That bird which liveth in Arabia, and buildeth its nest with cinna-
mon.” — Broom's Vulgar Errors.
1 “ The spirits of the martyrs will be lodged in the crops of green
birds.” — Gibbon, vol. ix. p. 421.
6	Shedad, who made the delicious gardens of Irim, in imitation of
Paradise, and was destroyed by lightning the first time he attempted to
enter them.
“ Is this then/* thought the youth, “ is this the way
“ To free man’s spirit from the deadening sway
“ Of worldly sloth ; — to teach him, while he lives,
“ To know no bliss but that which virtue gives,
“ And when he dies, to leave his lofty name
“ A light, a land-mark on the cliffs of fame ?
“ It was not so, land of the generous thought
“ And daring deed! thy godlike sages taught;
“ It was not thus, in bowers of wanton ease,
“ Thy Freedom nurs’d her sacred energies ;
“ Oh! not beneath th’ enfeebling, withering gjow
“ Of such dull luxury did those myrtles grow,
“ With which she wreath’d her sword, when she would
“ dare
“ Immortal deeds ; but in the bracing air
“ Of toil, — of temperance, — of that high, rare,
“ Etherial virtue, which alone can breathe
“ Life, health, and lustre into Freedom’s wreath!
“ Who, that surveys this span of earth we press,
“ This speck of life in time’s great wilderness,
u This narrow isthmus ’twixt two boundless seas,
M The past, the future, two eternities! —
“ Would sully the bright spot or leave it bare,
“ When he might build him a proud temple there,
“ A name, that long shall hallow all its space,
“ And be each purer soul’s high resting-place !
“ But no — it cannot be, that one, whom God
“ Has sent to break the wizard Falsehood’s rod, —
“ A Prophet of the Truth, whose mission draws
“ Its rights from Heaven, should thus profane his cause
“ With the world’s vulgar pomps ; — no, no — I see —
“ He thinks me weak — this glare of luxury
“ Is but to tempt, to try the eaglet gaze
“ Of my young soul; — shine on, ’twill stand the blaze!”
So thought the youth; — but, ev’n while he defied
This witching scene, he felt its witchery glide
Through every sense. The perfume, breathing round,
Like a pervading spirit; — the still sound
Of falling waters, lulling as the song
Of Indian bees at sunset, when they throng
Around the fragrant Nilica, and deep
In its blue blossoms hum themselves to sleep! 7
7	u My Pandits assure me that the plant before us (the Nilica) is their
Sephalica, thus named because the bees are supposed to sleep on its
blossoms.” — Sir W. Jones.
And music too — dear music! that can touch
Beyond all else the soul that loves it much —
Now heard far off, so far as but to seem
Like the faint, exquisite music of a dream ; —
All was too much for him, too full of bliss,
The heart could nothing feel, that felt not this;
Soften’d he sunk upon a couch, and gave
His soul up to sweet thoughts, like wave on wave
Succeeding in smooth seas, when storms are laid; —
He thought of Zelica, his own dear maid,
And of the time when, full of blissful sighs,
They sat and look’d into each other’s eyes,
Silent and happy — as if God had given
Nought else worth looking at on this side heaven !
“ Oh my lov’d mistress! whose enchantments still
“ Are with me, round me, wander where I will —
** It is for thee, for thee alone I seek
v “ The paths of glory — to light up thy cheek
“ With warm approval — in that gentle look,
To read my praise, as in an angel’s book,
“ And think all toils rewarded, when from thee
“ I gain a smile, worth immortality !
“ How shall I bear the moment, when restor'd
“ To that young heart where 1 alone am Lord,'
“ Though of such bliss unworthy, — since the best
w Alone deserve to be the happiest! —
** When from those lips, unbreath’d upon for years,
“ I shall again kiss off the soul-felt tears,
“ And find those tears warm as when last they started,
“ Those sacred kisses pure as when we parted !
“ Oh my own life! — why should a single day,
“ A moment keep me from those arms away ?”
While thus he thinks, still nearer on the breeze
Come those delicious, dream-like harmonies,
Each note of which but adds new, downy links
To the soft chain in which his spirit sinks.
He turns him tow’rd the sound, and, far away	^
Through a long vista, sparkling with the play	J
Of countless lamps, — like the rich track which Day J
Leaves on the waters, when he sinks from us ;
So long the path, its light so tremulous; —
He sees a groupe of female forms advance,
Some, chain'd together in the mazy dance
By fetters, forg’d in the green sunny bowers,
As they were captives to the King of Flowers; —
And some disporting round, unlink’d and free,
Who seem’d to mock their sisters’ slavery,
And round and round them still, in wheeling flight
Went, like gay moths about a lamp at night; —·
While others wak’d, as gracefully along
Their feet kept time, the very soul of song
From psaltery, pipe, and lutes of heavenly thrill,
Or their own youthful voices, heavenlier still!
And now they come, now pass before his eye,
Forms such as Nature moulds, when she would vie
With Fancy’s pencil, and give birth to things
Lovely beyond its fairest picturings !
Awhile they dance before him, then divide,
Breaking, like rosy clouds at even-tide
Around the rich pavilion of the sun, —
Till silently dispersing, one by one,
Through many a path that from the chamber leads
To gardens, terraces, and moonlight meads,
Their distant laughter comes upon the wind,
And but one trembling nymph remains behind,
Beck’ning them back in vain, for they are gone,
And she is left in all that light alone;
No veil to curtain o’er her beauteous brow,
In its young bashfulness more beauteous now;
But a light, golden chain-work round her hair,
Such as the maids of Yezd and Shiraz wear,
From which, on either side, gracefully hung
A golden amulet, in the’ Arab tongue,
Engraven o’er with some immortal line
From holy writ, or bard scarce less divine ;
While her left hand, as shrinkingly she stood,
Held a small lute of gold and sandal-wood,
Which, once or twice, she touch’d with hurried strain,
Then took her trembling fingers off again.
But when at length a timid glance she stole
At Azim, the sweet gravity of soul
She saw through all his features calm’d her fear,
And, like a half-tam’d antelope, more near,
Though shrinking still, she came; — then sat her down
Upon a musnud’s 8 edge, and, bolder grown,
In the pathetic mode of Isfahan9
Touch’d a preluding strain, and thus began : —
•	Musnuds are cushioned seats, usually reserved for persons of
distinction.
9 The Persians, like the ancient Greeks, call their musical modes or
Perdas by the names of different countries or cities, as the mode of
Isfahan, the mode of Jr^k, &c.
There’s a bower of roses by Bendemeer’s ' stream,
And the nightingale sings round it all the day long;
In the time of my childhood ’twas like a sweet dream,
To sit in the roses and hear the bird’s song.
That bower and its music I never forget,
But oft when alone, in the bloom of the year,
I think — is the nightingale singing there yet ?
Are the roses still bright by the calm Bendemeer ?
No, the roses soon wither’d that hung o’er the wave,
But some blossoms were gather’d, while freshly they
shone,
And a dew was distill’d from their flowers, that gave
All the fragrance of summer, when summer was gone.
Thus memory draws from delight, ere it dies,
An essence that breathes of it many a year;
Thus bright to my soul, as ’twas then to my eyes,
Is that bower on the banks of the calm Bendemeer !
A river which flows near the ruins of Chilminar.
“ Poor maiden!” thought the youth, “ if thou wert sent,
“ With thy soft lute and beauty’s blandishment,
“ To wake unholy wishes in this heart,
“ Or tempt its truth, thou little know'st the art.
“ For though thy lips should sweetly counsel wrong,
“ Those vestal eyes would disavow its song.
“ But thou hast breath’d such purity, thy lay
“ Returns so fondly to youth’s virtuous day,
“ And leads thy soul — if e’er it wander’d thence —
“ So gently back to its first innocence,
“ That I would sooner stop th’ unchained dove,
“ When swift returning to its home of love,
“ And round its snowy wing new fetters twine,
“ Than turn from virtue one pure wish of thine !”
Scarce had this feeling pass’d, when, sparkling through
The gently open’d curtains of light blue
That veil’d the breezy casement, countless eyes
Peeping like stars through the blue evening skies,
Look'd laughing in, as if to mock the pair
That sat so still and melancholy there. —
And now the curtains fly apart, and in
From the cool air, ’mid showers of jessamine
Which those without fling after them m play,
Two lightsome maidens spring, lightsome as they
Who live in the’ air on odours, and around
The bright saloon, scarce conscious of the ground,
Chace one another, in a varying dance
Of mirth and languor, coyness and advance,
Too eloquently like love’s warm pursuit: —
While she, who sung so gently to the lute
Her dream of home, steals timidly away,
Shrinking as violets do in summer's ray, —
But takes with her from Azim's heart that sigh
We sometimes give to forms that pass us by
In the world’s crowd, too lovely to remain,
Creatures of light we never see again !
Around the white necks of the nymphs who danc’d
Hung carcanets of orient gems, that glanc’d
More brilliant than the sea-glass glittering o’er
The hills of crystal on the Caspian shore;*
» “ To the north of us, (on the coast of the Caspian, near Badku)
was a mountain, which sparkled like diamonds, arising from the sea-glass
and crystals, with which it abounds.”— Journey of the Bassien Ambassador
to Persies 1746.
While from their long, dark tresses, in a fall
Of curls descending, bells as musical
As those that, on the golden-shafted trees
Of Eden, shake in the Eternal Breeze,3
Rung round their steps, at every bound more sweet,
As ’twere th’ extatic language of their feet!
At length the chace was o’er, and they stood wreath’d
Within each other’s arms j while soft there breath’d
Through the cool casement, mingled with the sighs
Of moonlight flowers, music that seemed to rise
From some still lake, so liquidly it rose,
And, as it swell’d again at each faint close,
The ear could track through all that maze of chords
And young sweet voices, these impassion’d words : —
A Spirit there is, whose fragrant sigh
Is burning now through earth and air,
Where cheeks are blushing, the Spirit is nigh,
Where lipsi are meeting, the Spirit is there !
*	“ To which will be added, the sound of the belis, hanging on the
trees,. which will be put in motion by the wind proceeding from the
throne of God, as often as the blessed wish for music.”—Sale.
His breath is the soul of flowers like these,
And his floating eyes — oh! they resemble
Blue water-lilies4, when the breeze
Is making the stream around them tremble!
Hail to thee, hail to thee, kindling power!
Spirit of Love, Spirit of Bliss!
Thy holiest time is the moonlight hour,
And there never was moonlight 90 sweet as this.
By the fair and brave,
Who blushing unite,
Like the sun and wave,
When they meet at night !
By the tear that shows
When passion is nigh,
As the rain-drop flows
From the heat of the sky!
By the first love^beat
Of the youthful heart}
The blue lotos, which grows in Cashmere and in Persia.
By the bliss to meet,
And the pain to part!
By all that thou hast
To mortals given,
Which — oh! could it last,
This earth were heaven!
We call thee hither, entrancing Power !
Spirit of Love! Spirit of Bliss!
Thy holiest time is the moonlight hour,
And there never was moonlight so sweet as this.
, \
Impatient of a scene, whose luxuries stole,
Spite of himself, too deep into his soul,
And where, midst all that the young heart loves most,
Flowers, music, smiles, to yield was to be lost,
The youth had started up, and turn’d away
From the light nymphs and their luxurious lay,
To muse upon the pictures that hung round, —
Bright images, that spoke without a sound,
And views, like vistas into fairy ground.
But here again new spells came o'er his sense ; —
All that the pencil’s mute omnipotence
Could call up into life» of soft and fair,
Of fond and passionate, was glowing there ;
Nor yet too warm, but touch’d with that fine art
Which paints of pleasure but the purer part;
Which knows ev’n Beauty when half-veil’d is best,
Like her own radiant planet of the west,
Whose orb when half retir’d looks loveliest!
There hung the history of the Genii-King,
Trac'd through each gay, voluptuous wandering
With her from Saba's bowers, in whose bright eyes
He read that to be blest is to be wise;5 —
Here fond Zuleika* woos with open arms
The Hebrew boy, who flies from her young charms,
Yet, flying, turns to gaze, and, half undone,
Wishes that heav'n and she could both be won !
5	For the loves of King Solomon, (who was supposed to preside over
die whole race of Genii) with Balkis, the Queen of Sheba or Saba
v. jyHerbelot, and the Notes on the Koran, Chap. 27.
6	The wife of Potiphar, thus named by the Orientals. Her adventure
with the patriarch Joseph is the subject of many of their poems and
romances.
And here Mohammed, born for love and guile,
Forgets the Koran in his Mary’s smile ; —
Then beckons some kind angel from above
With a new text to consecrate their love !7
With rapid step, yet pleas’d and lingering eye,
Did the youth pass these pictur’d stories by,
And hasten’d to a casement* where the light
Of the calm moon came in, and freshly bright
The fields without were seen, sleeping as still	Ψ
As if no life remain’d in breeze or rill.
Here paus’d he, while the music, now less near,
Breath’d with a holier language on his ear,
As though the distance, and that heavenly ray
Through which the sounds came floating, took away -
All that had been too earthly in the lay.	j
Oh! could he listen to such sounds, un mov’d,
And by that light — nor dream of her he lov’d ?
Dream on, unconscious boy! while yet thou may’st;
’Tis the last bliss thy soul shall ever taste.
7	The particulars of Mahomet’s amour with Mary, the Coptic girl,
in justification of which he added a new chapter to the Koran, may be
found in Gagmens Notes upon Abulfeda, p. 151 ·
Clasp yet awhile her image to thy heart,
Ere all the light) that made it dear, depart.
Think of her smiles as when thou saw’st them last,
Clear, beautiful, by nought of earth o’ercast;
Recal her tears, to thee at parting given,
Pure as they weep, if angels weep, in heaven!
Think in her own still bower she waits thee now,
With the same glow of heart and bloom of brow,
Yet shrin’d in solitude — thine all, thine only,
Like the one star above thee, bright and lonely!
Oh that a dream so sweet, so long enjoy’d,
Should be so sadly, cruelly destroy'd!
The song is hush'd, the laughing nymphs are flown,
And he is left, musing of bliss, alone; —
Alone ? — no, not alone — that heavy sigh,
That sob of grief, which broke from some one nigh —
Whose could it be? — alas! is misery found
Here, even here, on this enchanted ground?
He turns, and sees a female* form, close veil’d,
Leaning, as if both heart and strength had fail’d,
Against a pillar near; — not glittering o’er
With gems and wreaths, such as the others wore,
But in that deep-blue, melancholy dress,8
Bokhara’s maidens wear in mindfulness
Of friends or kindred, dead or far away; —
And such as Zelica had on that day
He left her, — when, with heart too full to speak,
He took away her last warm tears upon his cheek.
A strange emotion stirs within him, — more
Than mere compassion ever wak’d before; —
Unconsciously he opes his arms, while she
Springs forward, as with life’s last energy,
But, swooning in that one convulsive bound,
Sinks ere she reach his arms, upon the ground; —
Her veil falls off — her faint hands clasp his knees —
’Tis she herself! ’tis Zelica he sees!
But, ah, so pale, so chang’d, —none but a lover
Could in that wreck of beauty’s shrine discover
The once ador’d divinity! ev’n he
Stood for some moments mute, and doubtingly
Put back the ringlets from her brow, and gaz’d
Upon those lids, where once such lustre blaz’d,
•	“ Deep blue ie their mourning colour.” — Haimay.
Ere he could think she was indeed his own,
Own darling maid, whom he so long had known
In joy and sorrow, beautiful in both;
Who, ev’n when grief was heaviest — when loth
He left her for the wars — in that worst hour
Sat in her sorrow like the sweet night-flower,9
When darkness brings its weeping glories out,
And spreads its sighs like frankincense about!
“ Look up, my Zelica — one moment show
“ Those gentle eyes to me, that I may know
“ Thy life, thy loveliness is not all gone,
“ But there, at least, shines as it ever shone.
“ Come, look upon thy Azim — one dear glance,
“ Like those of old, were heav’n ! whatever chance
“ Hath brought thee here, oh ! ’twas a blessed one!
“ There — my sweet lids — they move — that kiss hath
“ run
“ Like the first shoot of life through every vein,
“ And now I clasp her, mine, all mine again!
9 The sorrowful nyctanthes, which begins to spread its rich odour
after sun-set.
« Oh the delight — now, in this very hour,
“ When had the whole rich world been in my power,
“ I should have singled out thee, only thee,
“ From the whole world’s collected treasury —
“ To have thee here — to hang thus fondly o’er
“ My own best, purest Zelica once more!” —
It was indeed the touch of those lov'd lips
Upon her eyes that chac’d their short eclipse,
And, gradual ae the snow, at heaven’s breath,
Melts off and shows the azure flowers beneath,
Her lids unclos’d, and the bright eyes were seen
Gazing on his ; — not, as they late had been,
Quick, restless, wild» , but mournfully serene,
As if to lie, ev’n for that tranced minute,
So near his heart, had consolation in it;
And thus to wake in his belov’d caress
Took from her soul one half its wretchedness.
But, when she heard him call her good and pure,
Oh ’twas too much — too dreadful to endure!
Shuddering she broke away from his embrace,
And, hiding with both hands her guilty face,
Said, in a tone whose anguish would have riven
A heart of very marble, “ pure! — oh Heaven.”----------------
That tone — those looks so chang’d — the withering
blight,
That sin and sorrow leave where’er they light —
The dead despondency of those sunk eyes,
Where once, had he thus met her by surprize,
He would have seen himself, too happy boy,
Reflected in a thousand lights of joy;
And then the place, that bright unholy place,
Where vice lay hid beneath each winning grace
And charm of luxury, as the viper weaves
Its wily covering of sweet balsam-leaves;1 —
All struck upon his heart, sudden and cold
As death itself; —it needs not to be told —
No, no — he sees it all, plain as the brand
Of burning shame can mark — whate er the hand,
That could from heav’n and him such brightness sever,
*Tis done — to heav’n and him she’s lost for ever!
*	“ Concerning the vipers, which Pliny says were frequent among
the balsam-trees, I made very particular enquiry; several were· brought
me alive both to Yam bo and Jidda.”— Bruce.
It was a dreadful moment; not the tears
The lingering, lasting misery of years
Could match that minute’s anguish ; — all the worst
Of sorrow’s elements in that dark burst
Broke o’er his soul, and, with one crash of fate,
Laid the whole hopes of his life desolate !
“ Oh ! curse me not,” she cried, as wild he toss’d
His desperate hand tow’rds heav’n—“ though I am lost,
“ Think not that guilt, that falsehood made me fall,
“ No, no — ’twas grief, ’twas madness cfid it all!
“ Nay, doubt me not—though all thy love hath ceas’d —
“ I know it hath — yet, yet believe, at least,
“ That every spark of reason’s light must be
“ Quench’d in this brain, ere I could stray from thee!
“ They told me thou wert dead — why, Azim, why
“ Did we not, both of us, that instant die
“ When we were parted? — oh! could’st thou but know
“ With what a deep devotedness of woe
“ I wept thy absence — o’er and o’er again
“ Thinking of thee, still thee, till thought grew pain,
“ And memory, like a drop that, night and day,
“ Falls cold and ceaseless, wore my heart away !
Didst thou but know how pale I sat at home,
My eyes still turn’d the way thou wert to come.
And, all the long, long night of hope and fear,
Thy voice and step still sounding in my ear —
Oh God ! thou would’st not wonder that, at last,
When every hope was all at once o’ercast,
When I heard frightful voices round me say
Azim is dead! — this wretched brain gave way,
And I became a wreck, at random driven,
Without one glimpse of reason or of Heaven —
All wild — and ev’n this quenchless love within
Turn’d to foul fires to light me into sin !
Thou pitiest me — I knew thou would’st — that sky
Hath nought beneath it half so lorn as I.
The fiend, who lur’d me hither — hist! come near,
Or thou too, thou art lost, if he should hear —
Told me such things — oh ! with such devilish art,
As would have ruin’d ev’n a holier heart —
Of thee, and of that ever-radiant sphere,
Where bless’d at length, if I but serv’d him here,
I should for ever live in thy dear sight,
And drink from those pure eyes eternal light!
Think, think how lost, how madden'd I must be,
To hope that guilt could lead to God or thee!
Thou weep’st for me — do, weep — oh ! that I durst
Kiss off that tear ! but, no — these lips are curst,
They must not touch thee j — one divine caress,
One blessed moment of forgetfulness
I’ve had within those arms, and that shall lie,
Shrin’d in my soul’s deep memory till I die !
The last of joy’s last relics here below,
The one sweet drop, in all this waste of woe,
My heart has treasur’d from affection’s spring,
To soothe and cool its deadly withering !
But thou — yes, thou must go — for ever go;
This place is not for thee — for thee! oh no,
Did I but tell thee half, thy tortur’d brain
Would burn like mine, and mine go wild again !
Enough, that Guilt reigns here — that hearts, once
“ good,
Now tainted, chill’d and broken, are his food. —
Enough, that we are parted — that there rolls
A flood of headlong fate between our souls,
Whose darkness severs me as wide from thee
As hell from heav’n, to all eternity !” —
“ Zelica ! Zelica !” the youth exclaim’d,
In all the tortures of a mind inflam’d
Almost to madness — “ by that sacred Heav’n,
“ Where yet, if pray’rs can move, thou’lt be forgiven,
“ As thou art here — here, in this writhing heart,
“ All sinful, wild and ruin’d as thou art!
“ By the remembrance of our once pure love,
“ Which, like a church-yard light, still burns above
“ The grave of our lost souls — which guilt in thee
“ Cannot extinguish, nor despair in me !
“ I do conjure, implore thee to fly hence —
“ If thou hast yet one spark of innocence,
“ Fly with me from this place,---------”
“ With thee ! oh bliss,
“ ’Tis worth whole years of torment to hear this.
" What! take the lost one with thee ? let her rove
“ By thy dear side, as in those days of love,
“ When we were both so happy, both so pure —
“ Too heavenly dream ! if there’s on earth a cure
“ For the sunk heart, ’tis this — day after day
“ To be the blest companion of thy way; —
“ To hear thy angel eloquence — to see
“ Those virtuous eyes for ever turn'd on me j
“ And in their light re-chasten’d silently,
“ Like the stain’d web that whitens in the sun,
“ Grow pure by being purely shone upon !
M And thou wilt pray for me — I know thou wilt —
“ At the dim vesper hour, when thoughts of guilt
u Come heaviest o’er the heart, thou’lt lift thine eyes,
** Full of sweet tears unto the darkening skies,
“ And plead for me with Heav’n, till I can dare
“ To fix my own weak, sinful glances there ; —
“ Till the good angels, when they see me cling
“ For ever near thee, pale and sorrowing,
u Shall for thy sake pronounce my soul forgiven,
“ And bid thee take thy weeping slave to heaven !
“ Oh yes, I’ll fly with thee-------”
Scarce had she said -
These breathless words, when a voice deep and dread
As that of Monker, waking up the Dead
From their first sleep — so startling ’twas to both —
Bung through the casement near “ Thy oath ! thy oath!
Oh Heav’n, the ghastliness of that Maid’s look ! —
“ ’Tis he,” faintly she cried, while terror shook
Her inmost core, nor durst she lift her eyes,
Though through the casement, now, nought but the skies
And moon-light fields were seen, calm as before —
“ ’Tis he, and I am his —7 all, all is o’er —
“ Go — fly this instant, or thou’rt ruin’d too —
“ My oath, my oath, oh God! ’tis all too true,
“ True as the worm in this cold heart it is —
“ I am Mokanna’s bride — his, Azim, his —
“ The Dead stood round us, while I spoke that vow,
“ Their blue lips echoed it — I hear them now!
“ Their eyes glar’d on me, while I pledg’d that bowl,
“ ’Twas burning blood — I feel it in my soul!
“ And the Veil’d Bridegroom — hist! I’ve seen to-night
“ What angels know not of — so foul a sight,
“ So horrible — oh ! never may’st thou see
“ What there lies hid from all but hell and me !
“ But I must hence — off, off— I am not thine,
“ Nor Heav’n’s, nor Love’s, nor aught that is divine________
« Hold me not — ha ! — think’st thou the fiends that
“ sever
u Hearts, cannot sunder hands?—thus, then— for ever!”
With all that strength, which madness lends the weak»
She flung away his arm ; and, with a shriek,
Whose sound, though he should linger out more years
Than wretch e’er told, can never leave his ears,—
Flew up through that long avenue of light,
Fleetly as some dark, ominous bird of night	!
Across the sun, and st>on was out of sight!	J
Lalla Rookh could think of nothing all day but
the misery of these two young lovers. Her gaiety was
gone, and she looked pensively even upon Fadla-
deen. She felt too, without knowing why, a sort of
uneasy pleasure in imagining that Azim must have been
just such a youth as Feramorz ; just as worthy to enjoy
all the blessings, without any of the pangs, of that
illusive passion, which too often, like the sunny apples of
Istkahar, is all sweetness on one side, and all bitterness
on the other.
As they passed along a sequestered river after sunset,
they saw a young Hindoo girl upon the bank, whose
employment seemed to them so strange, that they stopped
their palankeens to observe her. She had lighted a small
lamp, filled with oil of cocoa, and placing it in an earthen
dish, adorned with a wreath of flowers, had committed
it with a trembling hand to the stream, and was now
anxiously watching its progress down the current, heed-
less of the gay cavalcade which had drawn up beside
her. Lalla Rookh was all curiosity;— when one of
her attendants, who had lived upon the banks of the
Ganges, (where this ceremony is so frequent, that often
in the dusk of the evening, the river is seen glittering
all over with lights, like the Oton-tala or Sea of Stars,)
informed the Princess that it was the usual way, in
which the friends of those who had gone on dangerous
voyages, offered up vows for their safe return. If the
lamp sunk immediately, the omen was disastrous; but
if it went shining down the stream, and continued to
bum till entirely out of sight, the return of the beloved
object was considered as certain.
Lalla Rookh, as they moved on, more than once
looked back, to observe how the young Hindoo’s lamp
proceeded; and, while she saw with pleasure that it was
still unextinguished, she could not help fearing that all the
hopes of this life were no better than that feeble light
upon the river. The remainder of the journey was pass-
ed in silence. She now, for the first time, felt that shade
of melancholy, which comes over the youthful maiden’s
heart, as sweet and transient as her own breath upon a
mirror j nor was it till she heard die lute of Feramorz,
touched lightly at the door of her pavilion, that she
waked from the reverie in which she had been wandering.
Instantly her eyes were lighted up with pleasure, and,
after a few unheard remarks from Fadladeen upon the
indecorum of a poet seating himself in presence of
a Princess, every thing was arranged as on the preced-
ing evening, and all listened with eagerness, while the
story was thus continued: —
W hose are the gilded tents that crowd the way,
Where all was waste and silent yesterday ?
This City of War which, in a few short hours,
Hath sprung up here, as if the magic powers
Of Him who, in the twinkling of a star,
Built the high pillar’d halls of Chilminar,1
Had conjur’d up, far as the eye can see,
This world of tents and domes and sun-bright armory!—
Princely pavilions, screen’d by many a fold
Of crimson cloth, and topp’d with balls of gold; —
Steeds, with their housings of rich silver spun,
Their chains and poitrels glittering in the sun j
And camels, tufted o’er with Yemen’s shells,
Shaking in every breeze their light-ton’d bells !
But yester-eve, so motionless around,
So mute was this wide plain, that not a sound
1 The edifices of Chilminar and Balbec are supposed to have been built
by the Genii, acting under the orders of Jan ben Jan, who governed the
world long before the time of Adam.
But the far torrent, or the locust-bird *
Hunting among the thickets, could be heard; —
Yet hark ! what discords now, of every kind,
Shouts, laughs, and screams are revelling in the wind !
The neigh of cavalry ; — the tinkling throngs
Of laden camels and their drivers’ songs j —
Ringing of arms, and flapping in the breeze
Of streamers from ten thousand canopies; —
War-music, bursting out from time to time
With gong and tymbalon’s tremendous chime; —
Or, in the pause, when harsher sounds are mute,
The mellow breathings of some horn or flute,
That far off, broken by the eagle note
Of the* Abyssinian trumpet3, swell and float!
Who leads this mighty army ? — ask ye “ who ?”
And mark ye not those banners of dark hue,
*
*
*	A native of Khorassan, and allured southward by means of the water
of a fountain between Shiraz and Ispahan, called the Fountain of Birds,
of which it is so fond that it will follow wherever that water is carried.
3	“ This trumpet is often called in Abyssinia, nesser cano, which sig-
nifies the Note of the Eagle.”— Note of Bruce's editor.
The Night and Shadow4, over yonder tent ? —
It is the Caliph’s glorious armament
Rous’d in his Palace by the dread alarms,
That hourly came, of the false Prophet’s arms,
And of his host of infidels, who hurl’d
Defiance fierce at Islam 5 and the world; —
Though worn with Grecian warfare, and behind
The veils of his bright Palace calm reclin’d,
Yet brook’d he not such blasphemy should stain,
Thus unreveng’d, the evening of his reign,
But, having sworn upon the Holy Graves
To conquer or to perish, once more gave;
His shadowy banners proudly to the breeze.
And with an army, nurs'd in victories,
Here stands to crush the rebels that o’er-run
His blest and beauteous Province of the Sun.
4	The two black standards borne before the Caliphs of the House of
Abbas, were called, allegorically, The Night and The Shadow. —
v. Gibbon.
5	The Mahometan Religion.
6	“ The Persians swear by the Tomb of Shah Besade, who is buried
at Casbin; and when one desires another to asseverate a matter, he will
ask him, if he dare swear by the Holy Grave.” — Struy.
Ne’er did the march of Mahadi display
Such pomp before; — not ev’n when on his way
To Mecca’s Temple, when both land and sea
Were spoil’d to feed the Pilgrim's luxury ; *
When round him, mid the burning sands, he saw
Fruits of the North in icy freshness thaw,
And cool’d his thirsty lip, beneath the glow
Of Mecca’s sun, with urns of Persian snow :7 —
Nor e’er did armament more grand than that
Pour from the kingdoms of the Caliphat.
First, in the van, the People of the Rock, ·
On their light mountain steeds, of royal stock ;9
Then, Chieftains of Damascus, proud to see
The flashing of their swords' rich marquetry.1
Men, from the regions near the Volga's mouth,
Mix'd with the rude, black archers of the South j
*	Mahadi, in a single pilgrimage to Mecca, expended six millions of
dinars of gold. ,
» NivemMeccamapportavit,remibi aut nunquam aut raro yisam.-Abulfeda*
8	The inhabitants of Hejaz or Arabia Petraea, called by an Eastern
writer “ The People of the Rock.” — Ebn Haxikal.
9	“ Those horses, called by the Arabians Kochlani, of whom a written
genealogy has been kept for 2000 years. They are said to derive their
origin from King Solomon’s steeds.” — Niebuhr.
1 “ Many of the figures on the blades of their swords are wrought in
gold or silver, or in marquetry with small gems.” — Asiat. Misc. voL i.
And Indian lancers, in white-turban’d ranks
From the far Sinde, or Attock’s sacred banks,
With dusky legions from the Land of Myrrh,*
And many a mace-arm’d Moor and Mid-Sea islander.
Nor less in number, though more new and rude
In warfare's school, was the vast multitude
That, fir'd by zeal, or by oppression wrong'd,
Round the white standard of th' Impostor throng’d.
Beside his thousands of Believers, —blind,
Burning and headlong as the Samiel wind, —
Many who felt, and more who fear’d to feel
The bloody Islamite’s converting steel,
Flock’d to his banner; — Chiefs of the’ Uzbek race
Waving their heron crests with martial grace;3
Turkomans, countless as their flocks, led forth
From the’ aromatic pastures of the North;
Wild warriors of the turquoise hills, 4 — and those
Who dwell beyond the everlasting snows
«
*	Azab or Saba.
J “ The chiefs of the Uzbek Tartars wear a plume of white heron’s
feathers in their turbans.” — Account of Independent Tartary,
*	In the mountains of Nishapour and Tous (in Khorassan) they find
turquoises. — Ebn Haukal.
Of Hindoo Kosh, 5 in stormy freedom bred,
Their fort the rock, their camp the torrent’s bed.
But none, of all who own’d the Chief’s command,
Rush’d to that battle-field with bolder hand,
Or sterner hate than Iran’s outlaw’d men,
Her Worshippers of Fire6 — all panting then
For vengeance on the’ accursed Saracen ;
Vengeance at last for their dear country spurn’d,
Her throne usurp’d, and her bright shrines o’ertum’d.
From Yezd’s 7 eternal Mansion of the Fire,
Where aged saints in dreams of Heav’n expire ;
5	For a description of these stupendous ranges of mountains, v.
Elphinstone's Caubul.
6	The Ghebers or Guebres, those original natives of Persia, who ad-
hered to their ancient faith, the religion of Zoroaster, and who, after the
conquest of their country by the Arabs, were either persecuted at home,
or forced to become wanderers abroad.
7	“ Yezd, the chief residence of those ancient natives, who worship
the Sun and the Fire, which latter they have carefully kept lighted,
without being once extinguished for a moment, above 3000 years, on a
mountain near Yezd, called Ater Quedah, signifying the House or
Mansion of the Fire. He is reckoned very unfortunate who dies off that
mountain.” — Stephen's Persia·
From Badku, and those fountains of blue flame
That burn into the Caspian, 8 fierce they came,
Careless for what or whom the blow was sped,
So vengeance triumph’d, and their tyrants bled !
Such was the wild and miscellaneous host,
That high in air their motley banners tost
Around the Prophet-Chief — all eyes still bent
Upon that glittering Veil, where’er it went,
That beacon through the battle’s stormy flood,
That rainbow of the Held, whose showers were blood !
Twice hath the Sun upon their conflict set,
And ris’n again, and found them grappling yet;
While steams of carnage, in his noon-tide blaze,
Smoke up to Heav’n — hot as that crimson haze,
By which the prostrate Caravan is aw’d,
In the red Desert, when the wind’s abroad !
8	“ When the weather is hazy, the springs of Naptha (on an island
near Baku) boil up the higher, and the Naptha often takes fire on the
surface of the earth, and runs in a flame into the sea to a distance almost
incredible.” — Hammy on the Everlasting Fire at Baku.
w Ony Swords of God !” the panting Caliph calls, ■—
“ Thrones for the living — Heav’n for him who falls !” —
“ On, brave avengers, on,” Mokanna cries,
“ And Eblis blast the recreant slave that flies !”
Now comes the bruntj the crisis of the day —
They clash — they strive—the Caliph’s troops give way!
Mokanna’s self plucks the black Banner down,
And now the Orient World’s imperial crown
Is just within his grasp — when, hark, that shout!
Some hand hath check’d the flying Moslems’ rout,
And now they turn — they rally — at their head
A warrior, (like those angel youths, who led,
In glorious panoply of heav’n’s own mail,
The Champions of the Faith through Beder’s vale,) *
Bold as if gifted with ten thousand lives,
Turns on the fierce pursuers’ blades, and drives
At once the multitudinous torrent back,
While hope and courage kindle in his track,
And, at each step, his bloody falchion makes
Terrible vistas through which victory breaks !
9 In the great victory gained by Mahomet at Beder, he was assisted,
eay the Mussulmans, by three thousand angels, led by Gabriel,
mounted on his horse Hiazum. — v. The Koran and its Commentators.
In vain Mokanna, midst the general flight, -
Stands, like the red moon, on some stormy night,
Among the fugitive clouds that, hurrying by,
Leave only her unshaken in the sky! —
In vain he yells his desperate curses out,
Deals death promiscuously to all about,
To foes that charge and coward friends that fly,
And seems of all the Great Arch-enemy !
The panic spreads — “a miracle !” throughout
The Moslem ranks, “ a miracle !” they shout,
All gazing on that youth, whose coming seems
A light, a glory, such as breaks in dreams;
And every sword, true as o’er billows dim
The needle tracks the load-star, following him !
Right tow’rds Mokanna now he cleaves his path,
Impatient cleaves, as though the bolt of wrath
He bears from Heav’n withheld its awful burst
From weaker heads, and souls but half-way curst,
To break o’er Him, the mightiest and the worst!
But vain his speed — though, in that hour of blood,
Had all God’s seraphs round Mokanna stood,
With swords of fire, ready like fate to fall,
Mokanna’s soul would have defied them all; —
Yet now, the rush of fugitives, too strong
For human force, hurries ev’n him along;
In vain he struggles ’mid the wedg’d array
Of flying thousands, — he is borne away ;
And the sole joy his baffled spirit knows
In this forc’d flight is — murdering, as he goes !
As a grim tiger, whom the torrent’s might
Surprizes in some parch’d ravine at night,
Turns, ev’n in drowning, on the wretched flocks
Swept with him in that snow-flood from the rocks,
And, to the last, devouring on his way,
Bloodies the stream he hath not power to stay!
“ Alla ilia Alla !” — the glad shout renew —
“ Alla Akbar !” 1 — the Caliph’s in Merou.
Hang out your gilded tapestry in the streets,
And light your shrines and chaunt your ziraleets; *
The Swords of God have triumph’d — on his throne
Your Caliph sits, and the Veil’d Chief hath flown.
Who does not envy that young warrior now,
To whom the Lord of Islam bends his brow,
*	The Tecbir, or cry of the Arabs. “ Alla Acbar!” says Ockley,
66 means God is most mighty,”
*	The ziraleet is a kind of chorus, which the women of the East
sing upon joyful occasions. — Russel.
Jn all the graceful gratitude of power,
For his throne's safety in that perilous hour ?
Who doth not wonder, when, amidst the’ acclaim
Of thousands, heralding to heaven his name —
’Mid all those holier harmonies of fame,
Which sound along the path of virtuous souls,
Like music round a planet as it rolls ! —
He turns away coldly, as if some gloom
Hung o’er his heart no triumphs can illume; —
Some sightless grief, upon whose blasted gaze
Though glory’s light may play, in vain it plays !
Yes, wretched Azim ! thine is such a grief,
Beyond all hope, all terror, all relief;
A dark, cold calm, which nothing now can break,
Or warm or brighten, — like that Syrian Lake,*
Upon whose surface morn and summer shed
Their smiles in vain, for all beneath is dead ! —
Hearts there have been, o’er which this weight of woe
Came by long use of suffering, tame and slow;
But thine, lost youth ! was sudden — over thee
It broke at once, when all seem’d extacy;
*	The Dead Sea, which contains neither animal nor vegetable life.
When Hope look’d up, and saw the gloomy Past
Melt into splendour, and Bliss dawn at last —
’Twas then, ev’n then, o’er joys so freshly blown,
This mortal blight of misery came down ;
Ev’n then, the full, warm gushings of thy heart
Were check’d -— like fount-drops, frozen as they start!
And there, like them, cold, sunless relics hang,
Each fix’d and chill’d into a lasting pang !
One sole desire, one passion now remains,
To keep life's fever still within his veins,
Vengeance ! — dire vengeance on the wretch, who	cast
O’er him and all he lov’d that ruinous blast.
For this, when rumours reach’d him in his flight
Far, far away, after that fatal night, —
Rumours of armies, thronging to the’ attack
Of the Veil’d Chief, — for this he wing’d him back,
Fleet as the vulture speeds- to flags unfurl'd,	Ί
And came when all seem’d lost, and wildly hurl’d	>
Himself into the scale, and sav’d a world !	J
For this he still lives on, careless of all
The wreaths that glory on his path lets fall;
For this alone exists — like lightning-fire
To speed one bolt of vengeance, and expire !
But safe as yet that Spirit of Evil lives;
With a small band of desperate fugitives,
The last sole stubborn fragment, left unriven,
Of the proud host, that late stood fronting heaven,
He gain’d Merou —breath’d a short curse of blood
O’er his lost throne — then pass’d the Jihon’s flood,J
And gathering all, whose madness of belief
Still saw a Saviour in their down-fall’n Chief,
Rais’d the white banner within Neksheb’s gates,4
And there, untam’d, th’ approaching conqueror waits.
Of all his Haram, all that busy hive,
With music and with sweets sparkling alive,
He took but one, the partner of his flight,
One, not for love — not for her beauty’s light —
For Zelica stood withering midst the gay,
Wan as the blossom that fell yesterday
From the’ Alma tree and dies, while overhead
To-day’s young flower is springing in its stead !5
3	The ancient Oxus.	4	A city of Transoxiana*
5	“ You never can cast your eyes on this tree, but you meet there
either blossoms or fruit; and as the blossom drops underneath on the
ground, (which is frequently covered with these purple-coloured flowers)
others come forth in their stead,” &c. &c·— Nieuhqffl
No, not for love — the deepest Damn’d must be
Touch'd with heaven’s glory, ere such fiends as he
Can feel one glimpse of love’s divinity !
But no, she is his victim; — there lie all
Her charms for him — charms that can never pall,
As long as hell within his heart can stir,
Or one faint trace of heaven is left in her.
To work an angel’s ruin, — to behold
As white a page as Virtue e’er unroll’d
Blacken beneath his touch, into a scroll
Of damning sins, seal'd with a burning soul —
This is his triumph ; this the joy accurst,
That ranks him among demons all but first!
This gives the victim, that before him lies
Blighted and lost, a glory in his eyes,
A light like that with which hel 1-fire illumes
The ghastly, writhing wretch whom it consumes !
But other tasks now wait him — tasks that need
All the deep daringness of thought and deed
With which the Dives6 have gifted him — for mark,
Over yon plains, which night had else made dark,
6	The Demons of the Persian mythology,
Those lanterns, countless as the winged lights
That spangle India's fields on showery nights,7 —
Far as their formidable gleams they shed,
The mighty tents of the beleaguerer spread,
Glimmering along the' horizon's dusky line,
And thence in nearer circles, till they shine
Among the founts and groves, o’er which the town
In all its arm’d magnificence looks down.
Yet, fearless, from his lofty battlements
Mokanna views that multitude of tents;
Nay, smiles to think that, though entoil’d, beset,
Not less than myriads dare to front him yet; —
That friendless, throneless, he thus stands at bay,
Έν’η thus a match for myriads such as they !
“ Oh ! for a sweep of that dark Angel’s wing,
** Who brush’d the thousands of th’ Assyrian King8
“ To darkness in a moment, that I might
“ People Hell’s chambers with yon host to-night! —
“ But come what may, let who will grasp the throne,
“ Caliph or Prophet, Man alike shall groan ;
7	Carreri mentions the fire-fliee in India during the rainy season. —
v. his Travels.
*	Sennacherib, called by the orientals King of Moussal.—D’Herbelot.
“ Let who will torture him, Priest— Caliph — King —
“ Alike this loathsome world of his shall ring
“ With victims’ shrieks and howlings of the slave, —
“ Sounds, that shall glad me ev’n within my grave !”
Thus to himself—but to the scanty train
Still left around him, a far different strain: —
u Glorious defenders of the sacred Crown
** I bear from heav’n, whose light nor blood shall drown ·
“ Nor shadow of earth eclipse; — before whose gems
“ The paly pomp of this world’s diadems,
“ The crown of Gebashid, the pillar’d Throne
“ Of Pabviz 9, and the heron crest that shone,'
“ Magnificent, o’er Ali’s beauteous eyes,*
“ Fade like the stars when mom is in the skies:
9	Chosroes. For the description of his Throne or Palace, v. Gibbon
and UHerbdoU
1 “ The crown of Gerashid is cloudy and tarnished before the heron
tuft of thy turban.” — From one of the elegies or songs in praise of Ali,
written in characters of gold round the gallery of Abbas’s tomb. — v.
Chardin.
*	The beauty of Ali’s eyes was so remarkable, that whenever the
Persians would describe any thing as very lovely, they say it is Ayn
Hali, or the Eyes of Ali. — Chardin.
« Warriors, rejoice — the port, to which we've pass’d
“ O’er destiny’s dark wave, beams out at last!
** Victory’s our own — 'tis written in that Book,
“ Upon whose leaves none but the angels look,
“ That Islam's sceptre shall beneath the power
“ Of her great foe fall broken in that hour,
“ When the moon’s mighty orb, before all eyes,
“ From Neksheb’s Holy Well portentously shall rise!
“ Now turn and see !”----------
They turn’d, and, as he spoke,
A sudden splendour all around them broke,
And they beheld an orb, ample and bright,
Rise from the Holy Well, and cast its light
Round the rich city and the plain for miles,3 —
Flinging such radiance o’er the gilded tiles
Of many a dome and fair-rooFd imaret,
As autumn suns shed round them when they set!
Instant from all who saw th’ illusive sign
A murmur broke — “ Miraculous ! divine!”
i	II amusa pendant deux mois le peuple de la ville de Nekhscheb en
faisant sortir toutes leg nuits du fonds d’un puits un corps lumineux
semblable a la Lune, qui portoit sa lumiere jusqu’ a la distance de plu-
sieurs milles.” — UHerbelot. Hence he was called Sazend£h mah, or
the Moon-maker.
The Gheber bow’d, thinking his idol Star	^
Had wak’d, and burst impatient through the bar	>
Of midnight, to inflame him to the war !	J
While he of Moussa’s creed saw, in that ray,
The glorious Light which, in his freedom’s day,
Had rested on the Ark 4, and now again
Shone out to bless the breaking of his chain!
“ To victory!” is at once the cry of all —
Nor stands Mokanna loitering at that call,
But instant the huge gates are flung aside,
And forth, like a diminutive mountain-tide
Into the boundless sea, they speed their course
Right on into the Moslem’s mighty force.
The watchmen of the camp, — who, in their rounds,
Had paus'd and ev’n forgot the punctual sounds
Of the small drum with which they count the night,1
To gaze upon that supernatural light, —
4	The Shechinah, called Saldnat in the Koran. — v. SaWs Note, chap. ii.
5	The parts of the night are made known as well by instruments of
music, as by the rounds of the watchmen with cries and small drums· —
v. Burdens Oriental Customs, vol. i. p. 119.
Now sink beneath an unexpected arm,
And in a death-groan give their last alarm.
“ On for the lamps, that light yon lofty screen,®
“ Nor blunt your blades with massacre so mean;
“ There rests the Caliph — speed — one lucky lance
“ May now achieve mankind’s deliverance!” —
Desperate the die — such as they only cast,
Who venture for a world, and stake their last.
But Fate’s no longer with him — blade for blade
Springs up to meet them through the glimmering shade,
And, as the clash is heard, new legions soon
Pour to the spot, — like bees of Kauzeroon7
To the shrill timbrel’s summons, — till, at length,
The mighty camp swarms out in all its strength,
And back to Neksheb’s gates, covering the plain
With random slaughter, drives the adventurous train.
Among the last of whom, the Silver Veil
Is seen glittering at times, like the white sail	e
4	The Serrapurda, high screens of red cloth, stiffened with cane, used
to inclose a considerable space round the royal tents. — Notes on the
Bahardanusk.
» “ From the groves of orange trees at Kauzeroon the bees cull a
celebrated honey.” — Moriers Travels,
Of some toss’d vessel, on a stormy night,
Catching the tempest’s momentary light!
And hath not this brought the proud spirit low ?
Nor dash’d his brow, nor check’d his daring ? No.
Though half the wretches, whom at night, he led
To thrones and victory, lie disgrac’d and dead,
Yet morning hears him, with unshrinking crest,
Still vaunt of thrones, and victory to the rest; —
And they believe him ! — oh, the lover may
Distrust that look which steals his soul away; —
The babe may cease to think that it can play
With heaven’s rainbow; — alchymists may doubt
The shining gold their crucible gives out,
But Faith, fanatic Faith, once wedded fast
To some dear falsehood, hugs it to the last.
And well th’ Impostor knew all lures and arts,
That Lucifer e’er taught to tangle hearts;
Nor, mid these last, bold workings of his plot
Against men’s souls, is Zelica forgot
Ill-fated Zelica ! had reason been
Awake, through half the horrors thou hast seen,
Thou never couldst have borne it — Death had come
At once, and taken thy wrung spirit home.
But ’twas not so — a torpor, a suspense
Of thought, almost of life, came o’er th’ intense
And passionate struggles of that fearful night,
When her last hope of peace and heav’n took flight:
And though, at times, a gleam of frenzy broke, —
As through some dull volcano’s veil of smoke
Ominous flashings now and then , will start,
Which show the fire’s still busy at its heart;
Yet was she mostly wrapp’d in sullen gloom, —
Not such as Azim’s, brooding o'er its doom,
And calm without, as is the brow of death,
While busy worms are gnawing underneath! —
But in a blank and pulseless torpor, free
From thought or pain, a seal’d up apathy,
Which left her oft, with scarce one living thrill,
The cold, pale victim of her torturer’s will.
Again, as in Merou, he had her deck’d
Gorgeously out, the Priestess of the sept;
And led her glittering forth before the eyes
Of his rude train, as to a sacrifice;
Pallid as she, the young, devoted Bride
Of the fierce Nile, when, deck’d in all the pride	►
Of nuptial pomp, she sinks into his tide!7
And while the wretched maid hung down her head,
And stood, as one just risen from the dead,
Amid that gazing crowd, the fiend would tell
His credulous slaves it was some charm or spell
Possess’d her now, — and from that darken’d trance
Should dawn ere long their Faith’s deliverance.
Or if, at times, goaded by guilty shame,
Her soul was rous’d, and words of wildness came,
Instant the bold blasphemer would translate
Her ravings into oracles of fate,
Would hail heav’n’s signals in her flashing eyes,
And call her shrieks the language of the skies !
But vain at length his arts — despair is seen
Gathering around; and famine comes to glean
All that the sword had left unreap’d: — in vain
At mom and eve across the northern plain
7	“A custom still subsisting at this day, seems to me to prove that the
Egyptians formerly sacrificed a young virgin to the God of the Nile; for
they now make a statue of earth in shape of a girl, to which they give the
name of the Betrothed Bride, and throw it into the river.” — Savory.
He looks impatient for the promis'd spears
Of the wild Hordes and Tabtar mountaineers;
They come not — while his fierce beleaguerers pour
Engines of havoc in, unknown before,
And horrible as new;® —javelins, that fly
Enwreath’d with smoky flames throngh the dark sky,
And red-hot globes that, opening as they mount,
Discharge, as from a’ kindled Naptha fount,
Showers of consuming fire o’er all below ;
Looking, as through th' illumin’d night they go,
Like those wild birds9 that by the Magians oft,
At festivals of fire, were sent aloft
Into the air, with blazing faggots tied
To their huge wings, scattering combustion wide!
*	The Greek fire, which was occasionally lent by the Emperors to their
allies. “ It was,” says Gibbon, “ either launched in red-hot balls of
stone and iron, or darted in arrows and javelins, twisted round with flax
and tow, which had deeply imbibed the inflammable oil.”
9	^ At the great festival of fire, called the Sheb Sez£, they used to set
fire to large bunches of dry combustibles, fastened round wild beasts and
birds, which being then let loose, the air and earth appeared one great
illumination; and as these terrified creatures naturally fled to the wood for
shelter, it is easy to conceive the conflagrations they produced.” —
Richardson's Dissertation.
All Jiight, the groans of wretches who expire,
In agony, beneath these darts of fire,
King through the city — while, descending o’er
Its shrines and domes and streets of sycamore; —
Its lone bazars, with their bright cloths of gold,
Since the last peaceful pageant left unroll'd; —
Its beauteous marble baths, whose idle jets
Now gush with blood; — and its tall minarets,
That late have stood up in the evening glare
Of the red sun, unhallow’d by a prayer ; —
O’er each, in turn, the terrible flame-bolts fall,	λ
And death and conflagration throughout all	I
The desolate city hold high festival!	J
Mokanna sees the world is his no more; —
One sting at parting, and his grasp is o’er.
“ What! drooping now?”—thus, with unblushing cheek,
He hails the few, who yet can hear him speak,
Of all those famish’d slaves, around him lying,
And by the light of blazing temples dying; —
“ What; drooping now ?— now, when at length we press
“ Home o'er the very threshold of success ;
“ When Alla from our ranks hath thinn’d away
“ Those grosser branches, that kept out his ray
“ Of favour from us, and we stand at length
“ Heirs of his light and children of his strength,
“ The chosen few, who shall survive the fall
" Of Kings and Thrones, triumphant over all!
“ Have you then lost, weak murmurers as you are,
“ All faith in him, who was your Light, your Star ?
" Have you forgot the eye of glory, hid
“ Beneath this Veil, the flashing of whose lid
fi Could, like a sun-stroke of the desert, wither
** Millions of such as yonder Chief brings hither ?
“ Long have its lightnings slept — tod long — but now
“ All earth shall feel th’ unveiling of this brow !
“ To-night — yes, sainted men ! this very night,
“ I bid you all to a fair festal rite,
“ Where, — having deep refresh’d each weary limb λ
“ With viands, such as feast Heav’n’s cherubim, I
“ And kindled up your souls, now sunk and dim, J
“ With that pure wine the Dark-ey’d Maids above
“ Keep, seal’d with precious musk, for those they love,’—
*	“ The righteous shall be given to drink of pure wine, sealed; the
seal whereof shall be musk.” — Koran, chap. lxxxiii.
I will myself uncurtain in your sight
“ The wonders of this brow’s ineffable light;
“ Then lead you forth, and with a wink disperse
“ Yon myriads, howling through the universe !”
Eager they listen —while each accent darts
jNew life into their chill’d and hope-sick hearts; —
Such treacherous life as the cool draught supplies
To him upon the stake, who drinks and dies !
Wildly they point their lances to the light
Of the fast sinking sun, and shout “ to-night!” —
“ To-night” their Chief re-echoes, in a voice
Of fiend-like mockery that bids hell rejoice !
Deluded victims — never hath this earth
Seen mourning half so mournful as their mirth!
Here, to the few, whose iron frames had stood
This racking waste of famine and of blood,
Faint, dying wretches dung, from whom the shout
Of triumph like a maniac’s laugh broke out; —
There, others, lighted by the smouldering fire,
Danc’d, like wan ghosts about a funeral pyre,
Among the dead and dying, strew’d around; —
While some pale wretch look’d on, and from his wound
Plucking the fiery dart by which he bled,
In ghastly transport wav’d it o’er his head!
’Twas more than midnight now — a fearful pause
Had follow’d the long shouts, the wild applause,
That lately from those Royal Gardens burst,
Where the Veil’d demon held his feast accurst,
When Zelica — alas, poor ruin’d heart,
In every horror doom’d to bear its part! —
Was bidden to the banquet by a slave,
Who, while his quivering lip the summons gave,	►
Grew black, as though the shadows of the grave
Compass’d him round, and, ere he could repeat
His message through, fell lifeless at her feet!
Shuddering she went — a soul-felt pang of fear,
A presage, that her own dark doom was near,
Rous’d every feeling, and brought Reason back
Once more, to writhe her last upon the rack.
All round seem’d tranquil — ev’n the foe had ceas’d,
As if aware of that demoniac feast,
His fiery bolts; and though the heavens look’d red,
’Twas but some distant conflagration’s spread.
But hark! — she stops — she listens — dreadful tone!
’Tie her Tormentor’s laugh — and now, a groan
A long deafch-groan comes with it — can this be
The place of mirth, the bower of revelry ?
She enters — Holy Alla, what a sight
Was there before her! By the glimmering light
Of the pale dawn, mix’d with the flare of brands
That round lay burning, dropp’d from lifeless hands,
She saw the board, in splendid mockery spread, '
Rich censers breathing, — garlands overhead, —
The urns, the cups, from which they late had quaff'd,
All gold and gems, but — what had been the draught ?
Oh ! who need ask, that saw those livid guests,
With their swoll’n heads sunk blackening on their breasts,
Or looking pale to heav’n with glassy glare,
As if they sought but saw no mercy there;
As if they felt, though poison rack’d them through,
Remorse the deadlier torment of the two!
While some, the bravest, hardiest in the train
Of their false Chief, who on the battle-plain
Would have met death with transport by his side,
Here mute and helpless gasp’d; — but, as they died»
Look’d horrible vengeance with their eyes’ last strain,
And clench’d the slackening hand at him in vain.
Dreadful it was to see the ghastly stare,
The stony look of horror and despair,
Which some of these expiring victims cast
Upon their souls* tormentor to the last j —
Upon that mocking Fiend, whose Veil, now rais’d,
Show’d them, as m death’s agony they gaz’d,
Not the long promis’d light, the brow, whose beaming
Was to come forth, all conquering, all redeeming,
But features horribler than Hell e’er trac’d
On its own brood j — no Demon of the Waste, *
No church-yard Ghole, caught lingering in the light
Of the bless’d sun, e’er blasted human sight
With lineaments so foul, so fierce as those
Th’ Impostor now, in grinning mockery shows —
“ There, ye wise Saints, behold your Light, your Star,—
“ Ye would be dupes and victims, and ye are.
“ Is it enough? or must I, while a thrill
“ Lives in your sapient bosoms, cheat you still ?
*	“ The Afghauns believe each of the numerous solitudes and deserts
of their country, to be inhabited by a lonely demon, whom they call the
Ghoolee Beeabau, or Spirit of the Waste. They often illustrate the
wildness of any sequestered tribe, by saying, they are wild as the Demon
of the Waste.” — Elphinstone’s Caubitl.
“ Swear that the burning death ye feel within,
“ Is but the trance, with which heav’n’s joys begin ;
“ That this foul visage, foul as e’er disgrac’d
<f Ev’n monstrous man, is — after God’s own taste;
“ And that — but see ! — ere I have half-way said
“ My greetings through, th’ uncourteous souls are fled.
“ Farewel, sweet spirits! not in vain ye die,
“ If Eblis loves you half so well as I. —
“ Ha, my young bride !—’tis well — take thou thy seat
- “ Nay, come—no shuddering—did’st thou never meet ,
“ The Dead before ?—they grac’d our wedding, sweet
“ And these, my guests to-night, have brimmM so true
“ Their parting cups that thou shalt pledge one too.
“ But — how is this ? — all empty ? all drunk up ?
“ Hot lips have been before thee in the cup,
“ Young bride, — yet stay — one precious drop remains,
“ Enough to warm a gentle Priestess’ veins j--------------
“ Here, drink — and should thy lover’s conquering arms
“ Speed hither, ere thy lip lose all its charms,
“ Give him but half this venom in thy kiss,
“ And I’ll forgive my haughty rival’s bliss!
“ For me — I too must die — but not like these
“ Vile, rankling things, to fester in the breeze j
“ To have this brow in ruffian triumph shown,
u With all death’s grimness added to its own,
“ And rot to dust beneath the taunting eyes
“ Of slaves, exclaiming 4 There his Godship lies!’—
“ No — cursed race — since first my soul drew breath,
“ They’ve been my dupes, and shall be, ev’n in death.
w Thou see’st yon cistern in the shade — ’tis fill’d
** With burning drugs, for this last hour distill’d ; —
“ There will I plunge me, in that liquid flame —
“ Fit bath to lave a dying Prophet’s frame! —
“ There perish, all — ere pulse of thine shall fail —
“ Nor leave one limb to tell mankind the tale.
“ So shall my votaries, wheresoe'er they rave,
“ Proclaim that Heav’n took back the Saint it gave j —
“ That I’ve but vanish'd from this earth awhile,
“ To come again, with bright, unshrouded smile !
“ So shall they build me altars in their zeal,
“ Where knaves shall minister, and fools shall kneel;
“ Where Faith may mutter o’er her mystic spell, "I
“ Written in blood — and Bigotry may swell	>
“ The sail he spreads for heav’n with blasts from hell iJ
“ So shall my banner, through long ages, be
“ The rallying sign of fraud and anarchy; —
“ Kings yet unborn shall rue Mokanna’s name,
“ And, though I die, my Spirit, still the same,
“ Shall walk abroad in all the stormy strife,
** And guilt, and blood, that were its bliss in life!
“ But, hark! their battering engine shakes the wall —
“ Why, let it shake — thus I can brave them all.
“ No trace of me shall greet them, when they come,
** And I can trust thy faith, for — thou’lt be dumb.
“ Now, mark how readily a wretch like me,
“ In one bold plunge, commences Deity !” —
He sprung and sunk, as the last words were said —
Quick clos’d the burning waters o’er his head,
And Zelica was left — within the ring
Of those wide walls the only living thing j
The only wretched one, still curs’d with breath,
In all that frightful wilderness of death !
More like some bloodless ghost, — such as, they tell,
In the lone Cities of the Silent3 dwell,
5	“ They have all a great reverence for burial-grounds, which they
sometimes call by the poetical name of Cities of the Silent, and which
they people with the ghosts of the departed, who sit each at the head of his
own grave, invisible to mortal eyes.” — Elphinstone.
And there, unseen of all but Alla, sit
Each by its own pale carcass, watching it.
But morn is up, and a fresh warfare stirs
Throughout the camp of the beleaguerers.
Their globes of fire, (the dread artillery, lent
By Greece to conquering Mahadi,) are spent;
And now the scorpion’s shaft, the quarry sent
From high balistas, and the shielded throng
Of soldiers, swinging the huge ram along, —
All speak th* impatient Islamite’s intent
To try, at length, if tower and battlement
And bastion’d wall be not less hard to win,
Less tough to break down than the hearts within.
First in impatience and in toil is he,
The burning Azim — oh! could he but see
That monster once alive within his grasp,
Not the gaunt lion’s hug, nor Boa’s clasp
Could match that gripe of vengeance, or keep pace
With the fell heartiness of Hate’s embrace!
Loud rings the ponderous ram against the walls;
Now shake the ramparts, now a buttress falls,
But still do breach — “ once more, one mighty swing
“ Of all your beams, together thundering!”
There — the wall shakes — the shouting troops exult
“ Quick, quick discharge your weightiest catapult
“ Bight on that spot, and Neksheb is our own!” —
'Tis done — the battlements come crashing down,
And the huge wall, by that stroke riv’n in two,	Ί
Yawning, like some old crater, rent anew,	>
Shows the dim, desolate city smoking through!	J
But strange! no signs of life — nought living seen
Above, below:— what can this stillness mean ?
A minute's pause suspends all hearts and eyes —
“ In through the breach*' impetuous Azim cries;
But the cool Caliph, fearful of some wile
In this blank stillness, checks the troops awhile. —
Just then, a figure, with slow step, advanc’d
Forth from the ruin'd walls; and, as there glanc'd
A sunbeam over it, all eyes could see
The well-known Silver Veil! —“ 'Tis He, ’tis He,
“ Mokanna, and alone !” they shout around;
Young Azim from his steed springs to the ground —
“ Mine, Holy Caliph! mine,” he cries, “ the task
“ To crush yon daring wretch — ’tis all I ask.”
Eager he darts to meet the demon foe,
Who still across wide heaps of ruin slow
And falteringly comes, till they are near;
Then, with a bound, rushes on Azim’s spear,
And, casting off the Veil in falling, shows —
Oh! — >tis his Zelica’s life-blood that flows !
I meant not, Azim,” soothingly she said,
As on his trembling arm she lean’d her head,
And, looking in his face, saw anguish there
Beyond all wounds the quivering flesh can bear —
“ I meant not thou should’st have the pain of this j —
“ Though death, with thee thus tasted, is a bliss
“ Thou would’st not rob me of, did’st thou but know'j
“ How oft I’ve pray’d to God I might die so!
“ But the Fiend’s venom was too scant and slow; — J
“ To linger on were maddening— and I thought
“ If once that Veil — nay, look not on it — caught
“ The eyes of your fierce soldiery, I should be
“ Struck by a thousand death-darts instantly.
“ But this is sweeter — oh! believe me, yes —
“ I would not change this sad, but dear caress,
“ This death within thy arms I would not give
“ For the most smiling life the happiest live !
“ All, that stood dark and drear before the eye
“ Of my stray'd soul, is passing swiftly by ;
** A light comes o'er me from those looks of love,
“ Like the first dawn of mercy from above;
“ And if thy lips but tell me I’m forgiven,
“ Angels will echo the blest words in heaven !
“ But live, my Azim ; — oh! to call thee mine
“ Thus once again ! — my Azim — dream divine!
“ Live, if thou ever lov’dst me, if to meet
“ Thy Zelica hereafter would be sweet,
“ Oh live to pray for her — to bend the knee
“ Morning and night before that Deity,
“ To whom pure lips and hearts without a stain,
« As thine are, Azim, never breath’d in vain,—
“ And pray that He may pardon her, — may take
« Compassion on her soul for thy dear sake,
“ And, nought remembering but her love to thee,
“ Make her all thine, all His, eternally!
“ Go to those happy fields where first we twin’d
“ Our youthful hearts together — every wind
“ That meets thee there, fresh from the well-known flowers,
“ Will bring the sweetness of those innocent hours
“ Back to thy soul, and thou may’st feel again
“	For thy poor ZeliCa as thou did’st then.
“	So shall thy orisons, like dew that flies	"J
* To heav’n upon the morning’s sunshine, rise	r
“ With all love’s earliest ardour to the skies!	*
“	And should they — but alas! my senses	fail —
“	Oh for one minute ! — should thy prayers prevail	—
“ If pardon’d souls may from that World of Bliss
“ Reveal their joy to those they love in this, —-
“ I’ll come to thee —in some sweet dream— and tell —
“ Oh Heaven — I die — dear love! farewel, farewel.”
Time fleeted — years on years had pass’d away,
And few of those who, on that mournful day,
Had stood, with pity in their eyes, to see
The maiden’s death, and the youth’s agony,
Were living still — when,, by. a rustic grave
Beside the swift Amoo’s transparent wave,
An aged man, who had grown aged there
By that lone grave, morning and night in prayer,
For the last time knelt down — and, though the shade
Of death hung darkening over him, there play'd
A gleam of rapture on his eye and cheek,
That brighten'd even Death — like the last streak
Of intense glory on the’ horizon’s brim,
When night o*er all the reet hangs chill and dim, —
His soul had seen a Vision, while he slept;
She, for whose spirit he had pray’d and wept
So many years, had come to him, all dreet
In angel smiles, and told him she was blest!
For this the old man breath’d his thanks, and died. — 1
And there, upon the banks of that lov’d tide,	j
He and his Zelica sleep side by side.
The story of the Veiled Prophet of Khorassan being
ended, they were now doomed to hear Fadladeen’s
criticisms upon it. A series of disappointments and
accidents had occurred to this learned Chamberlain
during the journey. In the first place, those couriers
stationed, as in the reign of Shah Jehan, between
Delhi and the Western coast of India, to secure
a constant supply of mangoes for the Royal Table, had,
by some cruel irregularity, failed in their duty; and to
eat any mangoes but those of Mazagong was, of course,
impossible. In the next place the elephant, laden with
his fine antique porcelain, had in an unusual fit of
liveliness shattered the whole set to pieces : — an irre-
parable loss, as many of the vessels were so exquisitely
old as to have been used under the Emperors Yan
and Chun, who reigned many ages before the dynasty
of Tang. His Koran too, supposed to be the identical
copy between the leaves of which Mahomet’s favourite
pigeon used to nestle, had been mislaid by his Koran-
bearer three whole days; not without much spiritual
alarm to Fadladeen, who, though professing to hold
with other loyal and orthodox Mussulmans, that sal-
vation could only be found in the Koran, was strongly
suspected of believing in his heart, that it could only
be found in his own particular copy of it. When to
all these grievances is added the obstinacy of the
cooks, in putting the pepper of Canara into his
dishes instead of the cinnamon of Serendib, we may
easily suppose that he came to the task of criticism
with, at least, a sufficient degree of irritability for the
purpose.
“ In order,” said he, importantly swinging about his
chaplet of pearls, “ to convey with clearness my opinion
of the story this young man has related, it is necessary
to take a review of all the stories that have ever
-----“ My good Fadladeen !” exclaimed the Princess,
interrupting him, “ we really do not deserve that you
should give yourself so much trouble. Your opinion
of the poem we have just heard, will, I have no doubt,
be abundantly edifying, without any further waste of
your valuable erudition.” “ If that be all,” replied
the critic, — evidently mortified at not being allowed
to shew how much h'e knew about every thing, but the
«
snbjeefc immediately before him; — “ if that be all that
is Required, the matter is easily dispatched.” He then
proceeded to analyze the poem, in that strain, so well
known to the unfortunate bards of Delhi, whose· cen-
sures .were an infliction from which few recovered,
and whose very praises were like the honey extracted
from the bitter flowers of the aloe. The chief
personages of the story were, if he fightly understood
them, an ill-favoured gentleman, with asveil over his
face; — a young lady, whose reason went ajid came
according as it suited the poet’s convenience to be
sensible or otherwise;—''and a youth in one of those
hideous Bucharian bonnets, who took the aforesaid
gentleman in a veil for a Divinity. “ From such
materials,” said he “ what can be expected? —
after rivalling each other in long speeches and
absurdities, through some thousands of lines as indi-
gestible as the filberds of Berdaa, our friend in the veil
jumps into a tub of aqua-fortis; the young lady dies
in a set speech, whose only recommendation is that
it is her last; and the lover lives on to a good old age,
for the laudable purpose of seeing her ghost, which he
at last happily accomplishes and expires. This, you
will allow, is a fair summary of the story; and if
Nasser, the Arabian merchant, told no better, our
Holy Ptophet (to whom be all honour and glory!) had
no need to be jealous of his abilities for story-telling/’'
With respect to the style, it was worthy of the
matter; — it had not even those politic contrivances of
structure, which make up for the commonness of the
thoughts by > the peculiarity of the manner, nor that
stately poetical phraseology by which sentiments mean
in themselves, like the blacksmith’s * apron converted
into a banner, are so easily gilt, apd embroidered
into consequence. Then, as to the versification, it was,
to say no worse of it, execrable: it had neither the
copious flow of Ferdosi, the sweetness of Hafez, nor
*	La lecture de ces Fables plaisoit· si fort aux Arabes, que, quand
Mahomet les entretenoit de l’Histoire de l’Ancien Testament, ils les
meprisoient^ lui disant que celles que Nasser leur racontoient έΐοίβηί
beaucoup plus belles. Cette p^ference attira a Nasser la malediction de
Mahomet et de tous ses disciples· — UHerbtlot.
» The blacksmith Gao, who successfully resisted the tyrant Zohak, and
whose apron became the Royal Standard of Persia.
the sententious march of Sadi; but appeared to him» in
the uneasy heaviness of its movements, to have been
modelled upon the gait of a very tired dromedary. The
licences too in which it indulged were unpardonable; —
for instance this line» and the poem abounded with
such; —■
Like the faint, exquisite music of a dream.
“ What critic that can count,” said Fadladeen, “ and
*
has his full complement of fingers to count withal, would
tolerate for an instant such syllabic superfluities ?” —
He here looked round and discovered that most of his
audience were asleep; while the glimmering lamps seem-
ed inclined to follow their example· It became necessary,
therefore, however painful to himself, to put an end
to his valuable animadversions for the present, and he
accordingly concluded, with an air of dignified candour,
thus; — “ notwithstanding the observations which I
have thought it my duty to make, it is by no means
my wish to discourage the young man; — so far from
it, indeed, that if he will but totally alter his style
of writing and thinking, I have very little doubt that
I shall be vastly pleased with him,”
Some days elapsed, after this harangue of the Great
Chamberlain, before Lalla Rookh could venture to ask
for another story. The youth was still a welcome guest
in the pavilion; — to one heart, perhaps, too dange-
rously welcome— but all mention of poetry was, as'if
by common consent, avoided. Though none of the
party had much respect for Fadladeen, yet his censures,
thus magisterially delivered, evidently made an impres-
sion on them all. The Poet himself, to whom criticism
was quite a new operation, (being wholly unknown in
that Paradise of the Indies, Cashmere,) felt the shock as
it is generally felt at first, till use has made it more
tolerable to the patient; — the Ladies began to suspect
that they ought not to be pleased, and seemed to
conclude that there must have been much good sense
in what Fadladeen said, from its having set them all
so soundly to sleep; — while the self-complacent
Chamberlain was left to triumph in the idea of having,
for the hundred and fiftieth time in his life, extin-
guished a Poet. Lalla Rookh alone — and Love
knew why — persisted in being delighted with all she
had heard, and in resolving to hear more as speedily
as possible. Her manner, however, of first returning to
the subject was unlucky. It was while they rested during
the heat of noon near a fountain, on which some hand
had rudely traced those well-known words from the
Garden of Sadi, — “ Many, like me, have viewed this
fountain, but they are gone, and their eyes are closed
forever!” — that she took occasion, from the melan-
choly beauty of this passage, to dwell upon the charms
of poetry in general. “ It is true,” she said, “ few
poets can imitate that sublime bird, which flies always
in the air, and never touches the earth:5 —it is only
once in many ages a Genius appears, whose words, like
those on the Written Mountain, last for ever : — but
still there are some, as delightful perhaps though not
so wonderful, who, if not stars over our head, are at
least flowers along our path, and whose sweetness of
the moment we ought gratefully to inhale, without
calling upon them for a brightness and a durability
beyond their nature. In short,” continued she, blush-
ing, as if conscious of being caught in an oration, “ it
is quite cruel that a poet cannot wander through his
regions of enchantment, without having a critic for
ever, like the old Man of the Sea, upon his back!” 4—
3 The Huma.	4	The	Story	of	Sinbad.
Fadladeen, it was plain, took this last luckless
allusion to himself, and would treasure it up in his
mind as a whetstone for his next criticism. A sudden
silence ensued; and the Princess, glancing a look at
Feramorz, saw plainly she must wait for a more cou-
rageous moment.
But the glories of Nature and her wild, fragrant airs,
. φ
playing freshly over the current of youthful spirits, will
soon heal even deeper wounds than the dull Fadladeene
of this world can inflict. In an evening or two after,
they came to the small Valley of Gardens, which had
been planted by order of the Emperor for his favourite
sister Rochinara, during their progress to Cashmere
some years before; and never was there a more spark-
ling assemblage of sweets, since the GuLzar-e-Irem, or
Rose-bower of Irem. Every precious flower was there
to be found, that poetry, or love, or religion has ever
consecrated; from the dark hyacinth, to which Hafez
compares his mistress’s hair, to the Cdmalatd, by whose
rosy blossoms the heaven of Indra is scented. As they
sat in the cool fragrance of this delicious spot, and
Lalla Rookh remarked that she could fancy it the
abode of that Flower-loving Nymph whom they worship
in the temples of Kathay, or of one of those Peris, those
beautiful creatures of the air, who live upon perfumes,
and to whom a place like this might make some amends
for the Paradise they have lost, — the young Poet, in
whose eyes she appeared, while she spoke, to be one of
the bright spiritual creatures she was describing, said
hesitatingly that he remembered a Story of a Peri,
which, if the Princess had no objection, he would venture
to relate. “ It is,” said he, with an appealing look to
Fadladeen, “ in a lighter and humbler strain than the
otherthen, striking a few careless but melancholy
chords on his kitar, he thus began: —
PARADISE AND THE PERL
One morn a Peri at the gate
Of Eden stood, disconsolate;
And as she listen’d to the Springs
Of Life within, like music flowing ;
And caught the light upon her wings
Through the half-open portal glowing,
She wept to think her recreant race
Should e'er have lost that glorious place! '
“ How happy,” exclaim’d this child of air,
“ Are the holy Spirits who wander there,
“ Mid flowers that never shall fade or fall;
“ Though mine are the gardens of earth and sea,
“ And the stars themselves have flowers for me,
“ One blossom of Heaven out-blooms them all!
" Though sunny the Lake of cool Cashmere,
“ With its plane-tree Isle reflected clear,5
“ And sweetly the founts of that Valley fall;
“ Though bright are the waters of Sing-su-hay,
“ And the golden floods, that thitherward stray,5
“ Yet — oh ’tis only the Blest can say
“ How the waters of Heaven outshine them all!
“ Go, wing thy flight from star to star,
“ From world to luminous world, as far
“ As the universe spreads its flaming wall;
“ Take all the pleasures of all the spheres,
“ And multiply each through endless years,
“ One minute of Heaven is worth them all!”
The glorious Angel, who was keeping
The gates of Light, beheld her weeping,
*	u Numerous email islands emerge from the Lake of Cashmere. One
k called Char Chenaur, from the plane trees upon it.” — Forster,
6	“ The Altan Kol, or Golden River of Tibet, which runs into the
Lakes of Sing-su-hay, has abundance of gold in its sands, which employs
the inhabitants all the summer in gathering it.” — Description of Tibet in
Pinkerton.
And, as he nearer drew and listen’d
To her sad song, a tear-drop glisten’d
Within his eyelids, like the spray
From Eden’s fountain, when it lies
On the blue flow’r, which — Bramins say —
Blooms no where but in Paradise!
“ Nymph of a fair, but erring line !”
Gently he said — “ One hope is thine.
“ 'Tis written in the Book of Fate,
“ The Pen yet may be forgiven
“ Who bring» to this Eternal Gate
“ The Gift that is most dear to Heaven !
“ Go, seek it, and redeem thy sin ; —
“ ’Tis sweet to let the Pardon’d in!”
Rapidly as comets run
To th’ embraces of the Sun: —
Fleeter than the starry brands,
Flung at night from angel hands 7
At those dark and daring sprites,
Who would climb th* empyreal heights,
1 “ The Mahometans suppose that falling stars are the firebrands
wherewith the good angels drive away the bad, when they approach too
near the einpyreum or verge of the Heavens.” —Fryer.
Down the blue vault the Peri flies,
And, lighted earthward by a glance
That just then broke from morning's eyes,
Hung hovering o’er our world’s expanse.
But whither shall the Spirit go
To find this gift for heav'n ? — “I know
“ The wealth” she cries “ of every urn,
“ In which unnumber'd rubies bum,
“ Beneath the pillars of Chilminar ;8 —
“ I know where the Isles of Perfume are
“ Many a fathom down in the sea,
“ To the south of sun-bright Araby ;9 —
“ I know too where the Genii hid
“ The jewell’d cup of their King Jamshid, '
" With Life's elixir sparkling high -—
“ But gifts like these are not for the sky.
•	The Forty Pillars; so the Persians call the ruins of Persepolis. It
is imagined by them that this palace and the edifices at Balbec, were built
by Genii, for the purpose of hiding in their subterraneous caverns, im-
mense treasures, which still remain there. —UHerbcloU VoLney.
9 The Isles of Panchaia.
1 “ The cup of Jamshid, discovered, they say, when digging for
the foundations of Persepolis.” — Richardson.
Where was there ever a gem that shone
Like the steps of Alla’s wonderful Throne?
And the Drops of Life — oh ! what would they be
In the boundless Deep of Eternity ?”
While thus she mus’d, her pinions fann’d
The air of that sweet Indian land,
Whose air is balm; whose ocean spreads
O'er coral banks and amber beds;
Whose mountains, pregnant by the beam
Of the warm sun, with diamonds teem ;
Whose rivulets are like rich brides,
Lovely, with gold beneath their tides;
Whose sandal groves and bowers of spice
Might be a Peri’s Paradise !
But crimson now her rivers ran
With human blood -— the smell of death
Came reeking from those spicy bowers,
And man, the sacrifice of man,
Mingled his taint with every breath
Upwafted from the innocent flowers!
Land of the Sun ! what foot invades
Thy Pagods and thy pillar’d shades —
Thy cavern shrines, and Idol stones,
Thy Monarchs and their thousand Thrones ?
’Tis He of Gazna 7 — fierce in wrath
He comes, and India’s diadems
Lie scatter'd in his ruinous path. —
His blood-hounds he adorns with gems,
Tom from the violated necks
Of many a young and lov’d Sultana ;8 —
Maidens, within their pure Zenana,
Priests in the very fane he slaughters,
And choaks up with the glittering wrecks
Of golden shrines the sacred waters!
Downward the Peri turns her gaze,
And, through the war-field’s bloody haze
7 Mahmood of Gazna, or Ghizni, who conquered Indie in the
beginning of the 11th century. — v. hie History in D&ao and Sir
J. Malcolm»
•	“ It is reported that the hunting equipage of the Sultan Mahmoud
was so magnificent, that he kept 400 grey-hounds and blood-hounds,
each of which wore a collar set with jewels, and a covering edged with
gold and pearls·” — Universal History, vol. iii.
Beholds a youthful warrior stand,
Alone, beside hie native river, —
The red blade broken in his hand
And the last arrow in his quiver.
“ Live,” said the Conqueror, “ live to share
The trophies and the crowns I bear !”
Silent that youthful warrior stood —
Silent he pointed to the flood
All crimson with his country's blood,
Then sent his last remaining dart,
For answer, to the’ Invader's heart.
False flew the shaft, though pointed well—
The Tyrant liv’d, the Hero fell!
Yet mark’d the Peri where he lay,
And when the rush of war was past,
Swiftly descending on a ray
Of morning light, she caught the last:—
Last glorious drop his heart had shed,
Before its free-bpm spirit fled!
“ Be this,” she cried, as she wing'd her flight,
“ My welcome gift at the Gates of Light.
“ Though foul are the drops that oft distil
“ On the field of warfare, blood like this,
“ For Liberty shed, so holy is,
“ It would not stain the purest rill,
“ That sparkles among the Bowers of Bliss !
“ Oh ! if there be, on this earthly sphere,
“ A boon, an offering Heaven holds dear,
“ ’Tis the last libation Liberty draws
“ From the heart that bleeds and breaks in her cause!”
“ Sweet,” said the Angel, as she gave
The gift into his radiant hand,
“ Sweet is our welcome of the Brave
“ Who die thus for their native Land. —
“ But see — alas ! — the crystal' bar
“ Of £den movies not — holier far
“ Than ev’n this drop the boon must be,
“ That opes the Gates of Heav’n for thee !”
Her first fond hope of £den blighted,
Now among Afric’s Lunar Mountains,1
Far to the South, the Peri lighted;
And sleek'd her plumage at the fountains
1 44 The Mountains of the Moon, or the Montes Lunae of antiquity,
at the foot of which the Nile is supposed to arise.” — Brttce.
Of that Egyptian tide, — whose birth
Is hidden from the sons of earth,
Deep in those solitary woods,
Where oft the Genii of the Floods
Dance round the cradle of their Nile,
And hail the new-born Giant’s smile ! *
Thence, over Egypt’s palmy groves,
Her grots, and sepulchres of Kings3
The exil’d Spirit sighing roves,
And now hangs listening to the doves
In warm Rosetta’s vale 4 — now loves
To watch the moonlight on the wings
Of the white pelicans that break
The azure calm of Mceris’ Lake.5
’Twas a fair scene — a Land more bright
Never did mortal eye behold !
Who could have thought, that saw this night
Those valleys and their fruits of gold
Basking in heav’n’s serenest light j —
*	“ The Nile, which the Abyssinians know by the names of Abey and
Alawy or the Giant·” — Asiat. Research. vol. i. p. 387.
s V. Perry’s View of the Levant for an account of the sepulchres in
Upper Thebes, and the numberless grots, covered all over with
hieroglyphics in the mountains of Upper Egypt.
4 “ The orchards of Rosetta are filled with turtle-doves.” — Sonnini.
1 Savary mentions the pelicans upon Lake Moeris.
Those groupes of lovely date-trees bending
Languidly their leaf-crown’d heads,
Like youthful maids, when sleep descending
Warns them to their silken beds ; * —
Those virgin lilies, all the night
Bathing their beauties in the lake,
That they may rise more fresh and bright,
When their beloved Sun's awake; —
Those ruin’d shrines and towers that seem
The relics of a splendid dream;
Amid whose fairy loneliness
Nought but the lap-wing’s cry is heard,
Nought seen but (when the shadows, flitting
Fast from the moon, unsheath its gleam)
Some purple-wing’d Sultana7 sitting
Upon a column, motionless
And glittering, like an idol bird ! —
“ The superb date-tree, whose head languidly reclines, like that of a
handsome woman overcome with sleep.” — Dqfard el Hadad.
7	“ That beautiful bird, with plumage of the finest whining blue» with
purple beak and legs, the natural and living ornament of the temples
and palaces of the Greeks and Romans, which from the stateliness of its
port, as well as the bnlliancy of its colours, has obtained the title of
Sultana.” — Sonnini.
Who could have thought, that there, ev*n there»
Amid those scenes so still arid fair,
The Demon of the Plague hath cast
From his hot wing a deadlier blast,
More mortal far than ever came
From the red Desert's sands of flame !
So quick, that every living thing
Of human shape, touch'd by his wing,
Like plants, where the Simoom hath past,
At once falls black and withering !
The sun went down on many a brow,
Which, full of bloom and freshness then,
Is rankling in the pest-house now,
And ne’er will feel that sun again !
And oh ! to see the’ unburied heaps
On which the lonely moonlight sleeps —
The very vultures turn away,
And sicken at so foul a prey!
Only the fierce hyaena stalks8
Throughout the city’s desolate walks
> Jackson» speaking of the plague that occurred in West Barbary,
when he was there, says, “ The birds of the air fled away from
the abodes of men. The hyaenas, on the contrary, visited the
cemeteries,” &c.
At midnight, and his carnage plies —
Woe to the half-dead wretch, who meets
The glaring of those large blue eyes 9
Amid the darkness of the streets !
« Poor race of Men !” said the pitying Spirit,
“ Dearly ye pay for your primal Fall —
“ Some flow’rets of Eden ye still inherit,
“ But the trail of the Serpent is over them all!”
She wept — the air grew pure and clear
Around her, as the bright drops ran j
For there’s a magic in each tear
Such kindly spirits weep for man !
Just then beneath some orange trees,
Whose fruit and blossoms in the breeze
Were wantoning together, free,
Like age at play with infancy—
Beneath that fresh and springing bower,
Close by the Lake, she heard the moan
Of one who, at this silent hour,
Had thither stoPn to die alone.
*	Bruce,
One who in life, where'er he mov'd,
Drew after him the hearts of many ;
Yet now, as though he ne’er were lov’d,
Dies here, unseen, unwept by any !
None to watch near him — none to slake
The fire that in his bosom lies,
With ev’n a sprinkle from that lake,
Which shines so cool before his eyes.
No voice, well-known through many a day,
To speak the last, the parting word,
Which, when all other sounds decay,
Is still like distant music heard.
That tender farewel on the shore
Of this rude world, when all is o’er,
Which cheers the spirit, ere its bark
Puts off into the unknown Dark.
Deserted youth! one thought alone
Shed joy around his soul in death —
That she, whom he for years had known
And lov’d, and might have call’d his own,
Was safe from this foul midnight’s breath;
Safe in her father's princely halls,
Where the cool airs from fountain falls,
Freshly perfum’d by many a brand
Of the sweet wood from India’s land,
Were pure as she whose brow they fann’d.
But see,—who yonder comes by stealth,
This melancholy bower to seek,
Like a young envoy, seat by Health,
With rosy gifts upon her cheek ?
’Tis she — far off, through moonlight dim,
He knew his own betrothed bride,
She, who would rather die with him,
Than live to gain the world beside! —
Her arms are round her lover now,
His livid cheek to hers she presses,
And dips, to bind his burning brow,
In the cool lake her loosen’d tresses.
Ah! once, how little did he think
An hour would come, when he should shrink
With horror-from that dear embrace,
Those gentle arms, that were to him
Holy as is the cradling place
Of Eden’s infant cherubim!
And now he yields — now turns away,
Shuddering as if the venom lay
All in those proffer’d lips alone —
Those lips that, then so fearless grown,
Never until that instant came
Near his unask’d or without shame.
“ Oh! let me only breathe the air,
“ The blessed air, that’s breath’d by thee,
“ And, whether on its wings it bear
“ Healing or death, ’tis sweet to me!
“ There, — drink my tears, while yet they fell, —
“ Would that my bosom’s blood were balm,
“ And, well thou know’st, I’d shed it all,
“ To give thy brow one minute’s calm.
“ Nay, turn not from me that dear face —
“ Am I not thine— thy own lov’d bride—
“ The one, the chosen one, whose place,
“ In life or death is by thy side!
“ Think’st thou that she, whose only light,
“ In this dim world, from thee hath shone,
“ Could bear the long, the cheerless night,
“ That must be hers, when thou art gone ?
“ That I can live, and let thee go,
“ Who art my life itself ? — No, no —
“ When the stem dies, the leaf that grew
“ Out of its heart must perish too!
“ Then turn to me, my own love, turn,
“ Before like thee I fade and burn j
“ Ging to these yet cool lips, and share
“ The last pure life that lingers there !”
She fails —■ she sinks —· as dies the lamp
In charnel airs or cavern-damp,
So quickly do his baleful sighs
Quench all the sweet light of her eyes!
One struggle — and his pain is past —
Her lover is no longer living!
One kiss the maiden gives, one last,
Long kiss, which she expires in giving !
“ Sleep,” said the Peri, as softly she stole
The farewel sigh of that vanishing soul,
As true as e’er warm’d a woman's breast —
“ Sleep on, in visions of odour rest,
“ In balmier airs than ever yet stirr’d
“ Th' enchanted pile of that holy bird,
“ Who sings at the last his own death lay,'
“ And in music and perfume dies away !”
Thus saying, from her lips she spread
Unearthly breathings through the place,
And shook her sparkling wreath, and shed
Such lustre o’er each paly face,
That like two lovely saints they seem’d
Upon the eve of dooms-day taken
From their dim graves, in odour sleeping; —
While that benevolent Peri beam'd
Like their good angel, calmly keeping
Watch o’er them, till their souls would waken !
But morn is blushing in the sky;
Again the Peri soars above,
Bearing to heav’n that precious sigh
Of pure, self-sacrificing love.
*	“ In the East, they suppose the Phoenix to have fifty orifices in his
bill, which are continued to his tail; and that, after living one thousand
years, he builds himself a funeral pile, sings a melodious air of different
harmonies through his fifty organ pipes, flaps his wings with a velocity
which sets fire to the wood, and consumes himself.”—Richardson.
High throbb’d her heart, with hope elate,
The Elysian palm she soon will win,
For the bright Spirit at the gate
Smil’d as she gave that offering in;
And she already hears the trees
Of Eden, with their crystal bells
Ringing in that ambrosial breeze
That from the Throne of Alla swells;
And she can see the starry bowls
That lie around that lucid lake,
Upon whose banks admitted Souls
Their first sweet draught of glory take ! *
But ah ! ev’n Peris* hopes are vain —
Again the Fates forbade, again
The* immortal barrier clos’d — “ not yet”
The Angel said as, with regret,
He shut from her that glimpse of glory —
“ True was the maiden, and her story,
1 “ On the shores of a quadrangular lake stand a thousand goblets,
made of stars, out of which souls predestined to enjoy felicity drink the
crystal wave.” — From Chateaubriand*s Description of the Mahometan
Paradise, in his Beauties of Christianity.
“ Written in light o’er Alla’s head,
“ By seraph eyes shall long be read.	'
“ But, Pebi, see—the crystal bar
“ Of Eden moves not — holier far
“ Than ev’n this sigh the boon must be
“ That opes the Gates of Heav’n for thee.”
Now, upon Stria’s land of roses 3
Softly the light of Eve reposes,.
And, like a glory, the broad sun
Hangs over sainted Lebanon ;
Whose head in wintry grandeur towers,
And whitens with eternal aleet,
While summer, in a vale of flowers
Is sleeping rosy at his feet
To one, who look’d from upper air
O’er all the enchanted regions there,
How beauteous must have been the glow,
The life, the sparkling from below!
3	Richardson thinks that Syria had its name from Suri, a beautiful and
delicate species of rose, for which that country has been always famous; r—
hence, Suristan, the Land of Roses.
Fair gardens, shining streams, with ranks
Of golden melons on their banks,
More golden where the sun-light falls ; —
Gay lizards, glittering on the walls 4
Of ruin’d shrines, busy and bright
As they were all alive with light; —
And, yet more splendid, numerous flocks
Of pigeons, settling on the rocks,
With their rich restless wings, that gleam
Variously in the crimson beam
Of the warm west, as if inlaid
With brilliants from the mine, or made
Of tearless rainbows, such as span
The unclouded skies of Peristan !
And then, — the mingling sounds that come,
Of shepherds’ ancient reed s, with hum
*	“ The number of lizards I saw one day in the great court of the
Temple of the Sun at Baalbec, amounted to many thousands; the ground,
the walls, and stones of the ruined buildings, were covered with them.” —
Bruce.
*	The Syrinx or Pan’s pipe is still a pastoral instrument in Syria. —
ButuU
Of'the wild bees of Palestine,
Banquetting through the flowery vales; —
And, Jordan, those sweet banks of thine,
And woods, so full of nightingales!
But nought can charm the luckless Peri j
Her soul is sad — her wings are weary —
Joyless she sees the sun look down
On that great Temple, once his own, *
Whose lonely columns stand sublime,
Flinging their shadows from on high,
Like dials, which the wizard, Time,
Had rais'd to count his ages by!
Yet haply there may lie conceal’d
Beneath those Chambers of the Sun,
Some amulet of gems, anneal’d
In upper fires, some tablet seal’d
With the Great Name of Solomon,
Which, spell’d by her illumin’d eyeq,
6 The Temple of the Son at Balbec.
May teach her where, beneath the moon,
In earth or ocean lies the boon,
The charm, that can restore so soon,
An erring Spirit to the skies!
Cheer’d by this hope she bends her thither j —
Still laughs the radiant eye of Heaven,
Nor have the golden bowers of Even
In the rich West begun to wither; ■—
When, o*er the vale of Balbec winging
Slowly, she sees a child at play,
Among the rosy wild-flowers singing,
As rosy and as wild as they;
Chacing, with eager hands and eyes,
The beautiful blue damsel-flies,7
That flutter’d round the jasmine stems, '
Like winged flowers or flying gems: —	'
And, near the boy, who tir'd with play
Now nestling ’mid the roses lay,
i “ You behold there a considerable number of a remarkable species
of beautiful insects, the elegance of whose appearance and their attire
procured for them the name of Damsels.” — Sonnini.
She saw a wearied man dismount
From his hot steed, and on the brink
Of a small imaret’s rustic fount
Impatient fling him down to drink.
Then swift his haggard brow he turn'd
To the fair child, who fearless sat»
Though never yet hath day-beam bum'd
Upon a brow more fierce than that,—
Sullenly fierce — a mixture dire,
Like thunder-clouds, of gloom and fire!
In which the Peri's eye could read
Dark tales of many a ruthless deed;
The ruin’d maid — the shrine profan'd —
Oaths broken — and the threshold stain’d
With blood of guests! — there written, all,
Black as the damning drops that fall
From the denouncing Angel’s pen,
Ere Mercy weeps them out again!
Yet tranquil now that man of crime,
(As if the balmy evening time
Soften'd his spirit,) look’d and lay,
Watching the rosy infant's play: —
Though still, whene'er his eye by chance
Fell on the boy’s, its lurid glance
Met that unclouded, joyous gaze,
As torches, that have burnt all night
Through some impure and godless rite,
Encounter morning's glorious rays.
But hark ! the vesper call to prayer,
As slow the orb of day-light sets,
Is rising sweetly on the air,
From Syria’s thousand minarets!
The boy has started from the bed
Of flowers, where he had laid his head,
And down upon the fragrant sod
Kneels, with his forehead to the south,
Lisping th’ eternal name of God
From purity’s own cherub mouth,
And looking, while his hands and eyes
Are lifted to the glowing skies,
Like a stray babe of Paradise,
Just lighted on that flowery plain,
And seeking for its home again!
Oh ’twas a sight — that Heav’n — that Child —
A scene, which, might have well beguil'd
Ev’n haughty Eblis of a sigh
For glories lost and peace gone by !
And how felt he, the wretched Man
Reclining there — while memory ran
O’er many a year of guilt and strife,
Flew o’er the dark flood of his life,
Nor found one sunny resting-place,
Nor brought him back one branch of grace !
“ There was a time," he said, in mild,
Heart-humbled tones — “ thou blessed child !
“ When young and haply pure as thou,
“ I look’d and pray’d like thee — but now —”
He hung his head —each nobler aim
And hope and feeling, which had slept
From boyhood’s hour, that instant came
Fresh o’er him, and he wept — he wept!
Blest tears of soul-felt penitence !
In whose benign, redeeming flow
Is felt the first, the only sense
Of guiltless joy that guilt can know.
“ There's a drop,” said the Pebi, “ that down from the
“ moon
“ Falls through the withering airs of June
“ Upon Egypt’s land,8 of so healing a power,
“ So balmy a virtue, that ev’n in the hour
M That drop descends, contagion dies,
" And health reanimates earth and skies ! —
“ Oh, is it not thus, thou man of sin,
“ The precious teats of repentance fall ?
“ Though foul thy fiery plagues within,
“ One heavenly drop hath dispell’d them all!
And now —- behold him kneeling there
By the child’s side, in humble prayer,
While the same sun-beam shines upon
The guilty and the guiltless one,
And hymns of joy proclaim through Heaven
The triumph of a Soul Forgiven !
’Twas when the golden orb had set,
While on their knees they linger’d yet,
•	The Nucta, or Miraculous Drop, which falls in Egypt precisely
on St. John’s day, in June, and is supposed to have the effect of stopping
the plague.
There fell a light, more lovely far	i
Than ever came from sunor star, ?.
Upon the tear that, warm and meek,
Dew'd that repentant sinner’^ cheek :	■
To mortal eye this light might seem ·	■	!
A northern flash or meteor beam—r- ->;* . ·.
But well the* enraptur’d ΡεΛι knew1 -	-
’Twas a bright smile the Angel threw ·
From Heaven’s gate, to hail that tear
Her harbinger of glory near ! : * ' *’· *·	■*
“ Joy, joy for ever ! my task is done —
“ The Gates are pass'd, and Heaven is won !
“ Oh ! am I not happy ? I am, I am —
“ To thee, sweet Eden ! how dark and sad
“ Are the diamond turrets of Shadukiam, *
“ And the fragrant bowers of Amberabad !
“ Farewel, ye odours of Earth, that die,
“ Passing away like a lover’s sigh; —
9 The Country of Delight, — the name of a Province in the kingdom
of Jinnietan, or Faiiy Land, the capital of which is called the city of
Jewels. Amberabad is another of the cities of Jinnietan.
“ My feast is now of the Tooba Tree,1
“ Whose scent is the breath of Eternity !
“ Farewel ye vanishing flowers, that shone
“ In my fairy wreath, so bright and brief, —
“ Oh ! what are the brightest that e’er have blown,
“ To the lote-tree, springing by Alla’s Throne,*
“ Whose flowers have a soul in every leaf!
“ Joy, joy for ever '. — my task is done —
w The Gates are pass’d, and Heav’n is won !’*
*	The tree Tooba, that stands in Paradise, in the palace of Mahomet*
y. Sale's Prelim. Disc.—Touba, says UfHerbelot^ signifies beatitude^
or eternal happiness.
a Mahomet is described, in the 53d Chapter of the Koran, as having
seen the angel Gabriel u by the lote-tree, beyond which there is no
passing: near it is the Garden of Eternal Abode.” This tree, say the
commentators, stands in the seventh Heaven, on the right hand of the
Throne of God.
“ And this," said the Great Chamberlain, “ is poetry!
this flimsy manufacture of the brain, which, in com-
parison with the lofty and durable monuments of
genius, is as the gold filigree-work of Zamara beside
the eternal architecture of Egypt \” After this gorgeous
sentence, which, with a few more of the same kind,
Fadladeen kept by him for rare and important occa-
sions, he proceeded to the anatomy of the short poem,
just recited. The lax and easy kind of metre in which
it was written ought to be denounced, he said, as one
of the leading causes of the alarming growth of poetry
in our times. If some check were not given to this
lawless facility, we should soon be overrun by a race
of bards as numerous and as shallow as the hundred
and twenty thousand Streams of Basra.1 They who
succeeded in this style deserved chastisement for their
1 M It is said that the rivers or streams of Basra were reckoned in the
time of Belai ben Abi Bordeh, and amounted to the number of ISO
thousand streams.1”-—Ebn Haukal.
very success;—as warriors have been punished, even
after gaining a victory, because they had taken the
liberty of gaining it in an irregular or unestablished
jnanner. What then was to be said to those who failed ?
to those who presumed, as in the present lamentable
instance, to imitate the license and ease of the bolder
sons of song, without any of that grace or vigour which
gave a dignity even to negligence;—who, like them,
flung the jereed* carelessly, but not, like them, to the
mark;—“ and who,” said he, raising his voice to excite a
proper degree of wakefulness in his hearers, “ contrive
to appear heavy and constrained in the midst of all the
latitude they have allowed themselves, like one of those
young pagans that dance before the Princess, who has
the ingenuity to move as if her limbs were fettered, in
a pair of the lightest and loosest drawers of Masuli-
patam !”
It was but little suitable, he continued, to the grave
march of criticism to follow this fantastical Peri, of
*	The name of the javelin with which the Easterns exercise, v. Chatillon,
Moeurs dcs Othomans, tom. 3. p. 161.
whom they had just heard, through all her flights and
adventures between earth and heaven, but he could not
help adverting to the puerile conceitedness of the Three
Gifts which she is supposed to carry to the skies,—a
drop of blood, forsooth, a sigh, and a tear! How the
first of these articles was delivered into the Angel’s “ ra-
diant hand", he professed himself at a loss to discover;
and as to the safe carriage of the sigh and the tear, such
Peris and such Poets were beings by far too incompre-
hensible for him even to guess how they managed such
matters. “ But, in short," said he, “ it is a waste of
time and patience to dwell longer upon a thing so in-
curably frivolous,—puny even among its own puny race,
and such as only the Banyan Hospital for Sick Insects1
should undertake."*
In vain did Lalla Rookh try to soften this inexora-
ble critic; in vain did she resort to her most eloquent
common-places,—reminding him that poets were a timid
*	For a description of this Hospital of the Banyans, v. Parsons’s Travels,
p. 262.
and sensitive race, whose sweetness was not to be drawn
forth, like that of the fragrant grass near the Ganges,
by crushing and trampling upon them;—that severity
often destroyed every chance of the perfection which it
demanded; and that, after all, perfection was like the
Mountain of the Talisman,—no one had ever yet reached
its summit.* Neither these gentle axioms, nor the still
gentler looks with which they were inculcated, could
lower for one instant the elevation of Fadladeen's
eyebrows, or charm him into any thing like encourage-
ment or even toleration of her poet. Toleration, in-
deed, was not among the weaknesses of Fadladeen ;—
he carried the same spirit into matters of poetry and
of religion, and, though little versed in the beauties or
sublimities of either, was a perfect master of the art of
persecution in both. His zeal too was the same in
either pursuit; whether the game before him was
pagans or poetasters,—worshippers of cows, or writers
of epics.
4	“ Near this is a curious hill, called Koh Talism, the Mountain of the
Talisman, because, according to the traditions of the country, no person
ever succeeded in gaining its summit.”—Kinneir.
They had now arrived at the splendid city of Lahore,
*
whose mausoleums and shrines, magnificent and num-
berless, where Death seemed to share equal honours
with Heaven, would have powerfully affected the heart
and imagination of Lalla Rookh, if feelings more of
this earth had not taken entire possession of them
already. She was here met by messengers, dispatched
from Cashmere, who informed her that the King had
arrived in the Valley, and was himself superintending
the sumptuous preparations that were making in the
Saloons of the Shalimar for her reception. The chill
she felt on receiving this intelligence,—which to a bride
Whose , heart was free and light would have brought
only images of affection and pleasure,—convinced her
that her peace was gone for ever, and that she was in
love, irretrievably in love, with young Feramorz. The
veil, which this passion wears at first, had fallen off, and
to know that she loved was now as painful as to love
without knowing it had been delicious. Feramorz
too,—what misery would be his, if the sweet hours of
intercourse so imprudently allowed them should have
stolen into his heart the same fatal fascination as into
hers;—if, notwithstanding her rank, and the modest
homage he always paid to it, even he should have yielded
to the influence of those long and happy interviews,
where music, poetry, the delightful scenes of nature,—
all tended to bring their hearts close together, and to
waken by every means that too ready passion, which
often, like the young of the desert-bird, is warmed into
life by the eyes alone!4 She saw but one way to pre-
serve herself from being culpable as well as unhappy,
and this, however painful, she was resolved to adopt.
Feramorz must no more be admitted to her presence.
To have strayed so far into the dangerous labyrinth was
wrong, but to linger in it, while the clew was yet in her
hand, would be criminal. Though the heart she had
to offer to the King of Bucharia might be cold and
broken, it should at least be pure; and she must only
try to forget the short vision of happiness she had
enjoyed,—like that Arabian shepherd, who, in wander-
ing into the wilderness, caught a glimpse of the Gardens
of Irim, and then lost them again for ever!6
5	The Arabians believe that the ostriches hatch their young by only
looking at them.—P. Vanslebe, Relat. (TEgypte.
6	V. Sale's Koran, note, vol. 2. p. 484.
The arrival of the young Bride at Lahore was cele-
brated in the most enthusiastic manner. The Rajas
and Omras in her train, who had kept at a certain
distance during the journey, and never encamped nearer
to the Princess than was strictly necessary for her
safeguard, here rode in splendid cavalcade through the
city, and distributed the most costly presents to the
crowd. Engines were erected in all the squares, which
cast forth showers of confectionary among the people;
while the artisans, in chariots adorned with tinsel and
flying streamers, exhibited the badges of their respective
trades through the streets. Such brilliant displays of
life and pageantry among the palaces, and domes, and
gilded minarets of Lahore, made the city altogether
like a place of enchantment;—particularly on the day
when Lalla Rookh set out again upon her journey,
when she was accompanied to the gate by all the fairest
and richest of the nobility, and rode along between ranks
of beautiful boys and girls, who waved plates of gold
and silver flowers over their heads7 as they went, and
then threw them to be gathered by the populace.
7	Ferishta.
For many days after their departure from Lahore,
a considerable degree of gloom hung over the whole
party. Lalla Rookh, who had intended to make
illness her excuse for not admitting the young minstrel,
as usual, to the pavilion, soon found, that to feign in-
disposition was unnecessary;—Fadladeen felt the
loss of the good road they had hitherto travelled, and
was very near cursing Jehan-guire (of blessed memory!)
for not having continued his delectable alley of trees,9
at least as far as the mountains of Cashmere;—while
the Ladies, who had nothing now to do all day but to
be fanned by peacocks' feathers and listen to Fad-
ladeen, seemed heartily weary of the life they led,
and, in spite of all the Great Chamberlain's criticisms,
were tasteless enough to wish for the Poet again. One
evening, as they were proceeding to their place of rest
for the night, the Princess, who, for the freer enjoyment
of the air, had mounted her favourite Arabian palfrey,
in passing by a small grove, heard the notes of a lute
from within its leaves, and a voice, which she but too
well knew, singing the following words:
9 The fine road made by the Emperor Jehan-Guire from Agra to
Lahore, planted with trees on each side.
Tell me not of joys above,
If that world can give no bliss,
Truer, happier than the Love
Which -enslaves our souls in this!
Tell me not-of Houris’ eyes;—
Far from me their dangerous glow,
If those looks that light the skies
Wound like some that bum below!
Who, that feels what Love is here,
All its falsehood—all its pain—
Would, for ev’n Elysium’s sphere,
Risk the fatal dream again ?
Who, that midst a desert’s heat
Sees the waters fade away,
Would not rather die than meet
Streams again as false as they ?
The tone of melancholy defiance in which these words
were uttered, went to Lalla Rookh's heart;—and,
as she reluctantly rode on, she could not help feeling
it as a sad but sweet certainty, that Fjsramorz was to
the full as enamoured and miserable as herself.
The place where they encamped that evening was
the first delightful spot they had come to since they
left Lahore. On one side of them was a grove full of
small Hindoo temples, and planted with the most
graceful trees of the East; where the tamarind, the
cassia, and the silken plantains of Ceylon were min-
gled in rich contrast with the high fan-like foliage of
the Palmyra,—that favourite tree of the luxurious bird
that lights up the chambers of its nest with fire-flies.9
In the middle of the lawn where the pavilion stood
there was a tank surrounded by small mangoe-trees, on
the clear cold waters of which floated multitudes of the
beautiful red. lotus, while at a distance stood the ruins
of a strange and awful-looking tower, which seemed
old enough to have been the temple of some religion
no longer known, and which spoke the voice of de-
solation in the midst of all that bloom and loveliness.
This singular ruin excited the wonder and conjectures
of all. Lalla Rookh guessed in vain, and the all-pre-
•	The Baya, or Indian Gross-beak.—Sir W. Jones.
tending Fadladeen·, who had never till this journey
been beyond the precincts of Delhi, was proceeding
most learnedly to show that he knew nothing whatever
about the matter, when one of the Ladies suggested,
that perhaps Feramorz could satisfy their curiosity.
They were now approaching his native mountains, and
this tower might be a relic of some of those dark super,
stitions, which had prevailed in that country before the
light of Islam dawned upon it. The Chamberlain, who
usually preferred his own ignorance to the best know-
ledge that any one else could give him, was by no
means pleased with this officious reference; and the
Princess too was about to interpose a faint word of ob-
jection, but, before either of them could speak, a slave
was dispatched for Feramorz, who, in a very few
minutes, appeared before them,—'looking so pale and
unhappy in Lalla Rookh's eyes, that she already re-
pented of her cruelty in having so long excluded him.
That venerable tower, he told them, was the remains
of an ancient Fire-Temple, built by those Ghebere
or Persians of the old religion, who, many hundred
years since, had fled hither from their Arab conquerors,
preferring liberty and their altars in a foreign land to
the alternative of apostacy or persecution in their own.
It was impossible, he added, not to feel interested in
the many glorious but unsuccessful struggles, which
had been made by these original natives of Persia to cast
off the yoke of their bigoted conquerors. Like their
own Fire in the Burning Field at Bakou,1 when sup-
pressed in one place, they had but broken out with
fresh flame in another; and, as a native of Cashmere, of
that fair and Holy Valley, which had in the same manner
become the prey of strangers, and seen her ancient
shrines and native princes swept away before the march
of her intolerant invaders, he felt a sympathy, he owned,
with the sufferings of the persecuted Ghebers, which
every monument like this before them but tended more
powerfully to awaken.
It was the first time that Feramorz had ever ven-
tured upon so much prose before Fadladeen, and it
may easily be conceived what effect such prose as this
must have produced upon that most orthodox and most
pagan-hating personage. He sat for some minutes
1 The “ Ager ardens" described by Kempfer, Jmcenitat. Exot,
aghast, ejaculating only at intervals, “ Bigoted con-
querors !—sympathy with Fire-worshippers!”—while
Feramorz, happy to take advantage of this almost
speechless horror of the Chamberlain, proceeded to say
that he knew a melancholy story, connected with the
events of one of those brave struggles of the Fire-
worshippers of Persia against their Arab masters,
which, if the evening was not too far advanced, he
should have much pleasure in being allowed to relate
to the Princess. It was impossible for Lalla Rookh
to refuse;—he had never before looked half so ani-
mated, and when he spoke of the Holy Valley his eyes
had sparkled, she thought, like the talismanic characters
on the scimitar of Solomon. Her consent was therefore
most readily granted, and while Fadladeen sat in
unspeakable dismay, expecting treason and abomina-
tion in every line, the poet thus began his story of the
Fire-worshippers :-r-
"Tis moonlight over Oman's Sea;1
Her banks of pearl and palmy isles
Bask in the night-beam beauteously,
And her blue waters sleep in smiles.
'Tis moonlight in Harmozia's3 walls,
And through her Emir's porphyry halls,
Where, some hours since, was heard the swell
Of trumpet and the clash of zel,3
Bidding the bright-eyed sun farewell;—
The peaceful sun, whom better suits
The music of the bulbul's nest,
Or the light touch of lovers' lutes,
To sing him to his golden rest!
All hush'd—there's not a breeze in motion;
The shore is silent as the ocean.
If zephyrs come, so light they come,
Nor leaf is stirr’d, nor wave is driven;—
1 The Persian Gulf, sometimes so called, which separates the shores of
Persia and Arabia.
1 The present Gombaroon, a town on the Persian ride of the Gulf.
J A Moorish instrument of music.
The wind-tower on the Emib's dome4
Can hardly win a breath from heaven.
Ev’nJhe, that tyrant Arab» sleeps
Calm, while a nation round him weeps;
While curses load the air he breathes,
And falchions frQm unnumbered sheaths
Are starting to avenge the shame
His race hath brought on Iuan's 5 name.
Hard, heartless Chief, unmov’d alike
Mid eyes that weep and swords that strike;—
One of that saintly, murderous brood,
To carnage and the Koran given,
Who think through unbelievers1 blood
Lies their directest path to heaven.
One, who will pause and kneel unshod
In the warm blood his hand hath pour'd,
To mutter o’er some text of God
Engraven on his reeking sword i—6
*	“ At Gombaroon and other places in Persia, they have towers for the
purpose of catching the wind, and cooling the houses.”—Le Bruyn.
1 “ Iran is the true general name for the empire of Persia.·”—Asiat. Rea.
Disc. 5.
0	“ On the blades of their scimitars some verse from the Koran is usually
inscribed.”—Russel.
Nay, who can coolly point the line,
The letter of those words divine,
To which his blade, with searching art,
Had sunk into its victim's heart!
Just Alla! what must be thy look,
When such a wretch before thee stands
Unblushing, with thy Sacred Book,—
Turning the leaves with blood-stained hands,
And wresting from its page sublime
His creed of lust and hate and crime!
Ev'n as those bees of Trebizond,—
Which from the sunniest flowers that glad
With their pure smile the gardens round,
Draw venom forth that drives men mad Γ
Never did fierce Arabia send
A satrap forth more direly great;
Never was Iran doom'd to bend
Beneath a yoke of deadlier weight.
Her throne had fall'n—her pride was crush'd—
Her sons were willing slaves, nor blush'd,
T “ There is a kind of Rhododendros about Trebizond, whose flowers
the bee feeds upon, and the honey thence drives people mad."— Tournefbrt.
In their own land,—no more their own,—
To crouch beneath a stranger's throne.
Her towers, where Mithra once had burn'd,
To Moslem shrines—oh shame!—were turn'd,
Where slaves, converted by the sword,
Their mean, apostate worship pour'd,
And curs'd the faith their sires ador'd.
Yet has she hearts, mid all this ill,
O'er all this wreck high buoyant still
With hope and vengeance;—hearts that yet,—
Like gems, in darkness issuing rays
They've treasur'd from the sun that's set,—
Beam all the light of long-lost days!
And swords she hath, nor weak nor slow
To second all such hearts can dare;
As he shall know, well, dearly know,
Who sleeps in moonlight luxury there,
Tranquil as if his spirit lay
Becalm'd in heav'n's approving ray!
Sleep on—for purer eyes than thine
Those waves are hush'd, those planets shine.
Sleep on, and be thy rest unmov'd
By the white moonlight’s dazzling power;—r
None but the loving and the lov’d
Should be awake at this sweet hour.
And see—where, high above those rocks
That o'er the deep their shadows fling,
Yon turret stands;—where ebon locks,
As glossy as a heron’s wing
Upon the turban of a king,8
Hang from the lattice, long and wild,—
Tis she, that Emib’s blooming child,
All truth and tenderness and grace,
Though bom of such ungentle race;—
An image of Youth's fairy Fountain
Springing in a desolate mountain !9
Oh what a pure and sacred thing
Is Beauty, curtain’d from the sight
Of the gross world, illumining
One only mansion with her light!
9 “ Their kings wear plumes of black herons’ feathers upon the right
side, as a badge -of sovereignty ”—Hanway.
9 “ The Fountain of Youth, by a Mahometan tradition, is situated in
some dark region of the east?—Richardson.
Unseen by man's disturbing eye,—
The flower, that blooms beneath the sea
Too deep for sunbeams, doth not lie
Hid in more chaste obscurity!
So, Hind a, have thy face and mind,
Like holy mysteries, lain enshrin'd.
And oh what transport for a lover
To lift the veil that shades them o'er!—
Like those who, all at once, discover .
In the lone deep some fairy shore,
Where mortal never trod before,
And sleep and wake in scented airs
No lip had ever breath'd but theirs!
Beautiful are the maids that glide,
On summer-eves, through Yemen's1 dales,
And bright the glancing looks they hide
Behind their litters' roseate veils
And brides, as delicate and fair
As the white jasmine flowers they wear,
Hath Yemen in her blissful clime,
Who, lull'd in cool kiosk or bower,
1 Arabia Felix.
Before their mirrors count the time,
And grow still lovelier every hour.
But never yet hath bride or maid
In Araby's gay Harams smil'd,
Whose boasted brightness would not fade
Before Al Hassan's blooming child.
Light as the angel shapes that bless
An infant's dream, yet not the less
Rich in all woman's loveliness;—
With eyes so pure, that from their ray
Dark Vice would turn abash'd away,
Blinded like serpents, when they gaze
Upon the emerald's virgin blaze!—a
Yet, fill'd with all youth’s sweet desires,
Mingling the meek and vestal fires	*
Of other worlds with all the bliss,
The fond, weak tenderness of this!
A soul too, more than half divine,
Where, through some shades of earthly feeling,
*	“ They say that if a snake or serpent fix his eyes on the lustre of those
stones (emeralds), he immediately becomes blind·”—Ahmed ben Abdalaziz,
Treatise on Jewels.
Religion's soften'd glories shine,
Like light through summer foliage stealing,
Shedding a glow of such mild hue,
So warm, and yet so shadowy too,
As makes the very darkness there
More beautiful than light elsewhere!
Such is the maid who, at this hour,
Hath risen from her restless sleep,
And sits alone in that high bower,
Watching the still and moonlight deep.
Ah! 'twas not thus^—-with tearful eyes
And beating heart,—she us'd to gaze
On the magnificent earth and skies,
In her own land, in happier days.
Why looks she now so anxious down
Among those rocks, whose rugged frown
Blackens the mirror of the deep ?
Whom waits she all this lonely night?
Too rough the rocks, too bold the steep,
For man to scale that turret's height!—
*
So deem'd at least her thoughtful sire,
When high, to catch the cool night-air,
After the day-beam's withering fire,®
He built her bower of freshness there,
And had it deck'd with costliest skill,
And fondly thought it safe as fair:—-
Think, reverend dreamer! think so still,
Nor wake to learn what Love can dare,—
Love, all-defying Love, who sees
No charm in trophies won with ease;—
Whose rarest, dearest fruits of bliss
Are pluck'd on Danger's precipice!
Bolder than they, who dare not dive
For pearls, but when the sea's at rest,
Love, in the tempest most alive,
Hath ever held that pearl the best
He finds beneath the stormiest water (
Yes—Araby's unrivail'd daughter,
Though high that tower, that rock-way rude,
There's one who, but to kiss thy cheek,
Would climb th' untrodden solitude
Of Ararat's tremendous peak,4
*	At Gombaroon and the Isle of Ormus it is sometimes so hot, that the
people are obliged to lie all day in the water.—Marco Polo.
*	This mountain is generally supposed to be inaccessible.
And think its steeps, though dark and dread,
Heav’n’s path-ways, if to thee they led!
Ev’n now thou seest the flashing spray,
That lights his oar's impatient way
Ev’n now thou hear’st the sudden shock
Of his §wift bark against the rock,
And stretchest down thy arms of snow,
As if to lift him from below!
Like her to whom, at dead of night,
The bridegroom, with his locks of light,5
Came, in the flush of love and pride,
And scal’d the terrace of his bride;—
When, as she saw him rashly spring,
And mid-way up in danger cling,
She flung him down her long black hair,
Exclaiming breathless, “ There, love, there!”
And scarce did manlier nerv£ *uphold
The hero Zal in that fond hour,
5 In one of the books of the Sh&h Nimeh, when Zal (a celebrated hero
of Persia, remarkable for his white hair), comes to the terrace of his mis-
tress Rodahver at night, die lets down her long tresses to assist him in
his ascent;—he, however, manages it in a less romantic way by fixing his
crook in a projecting beam.—v. Champion's Ferdosi.
Than wings the youth who fleet and bold
Now climbs the rocks to Hinda's bower.
See—light as up their granite steeps
The rock-goats of Arabia clamber,*
Fearless from crag to crag he leaps,
And now is in the maiden’s chamber.
She loves—but knows not whom she loves,
Nor what his race, nor whence he came;—j
Like one who meets, in Indian groves,
Some beauteous bird, without a name,
Brought by the last ambrosial breeze
From isles in the’ undiscovered seas,
To show his plumage for a day
To wondering eyes, and wing away 1
Will he thus fly—her nameless lover ?
Alla forbid ! 'twas by a moon
As fair as this, while singing over
Some ditty to her soft Kanoon,7
*	*ζ On the lofty hills of Arabia Petraea are rock-goats.*”—Niebuhr.
7 ** Canun, esp£ce de psalterion, avec des cordes de boyaux; lee dames
en touchent dans le serrail, avec des d£cailles armies de pointes de coco.*—
Toderini, translated by De Coumand.
Alone, at this same witching hour.
She first beheld his radiant eyes
Gleam through the lattice of the bower.
Where nightly now they mix their sighs;
And thought some Spirit of the air
(For what could waft a mortal there ?)
Was pausing on his moonlight way
To listen to her lonely lay!
This fancy ne’er hath left her mind;
And—though, when terror’s swoon had past,
She saw a youth, of mortal kind,
Before her in obeisance cast,—
Yet often since, when he has spoken
Strange, awful words,—and gleams have broken
From his dark eyes, too bright to bear,
Oh! she hath fear’d her soul was given
To some unhallow'd child of air,
Some erring Spirit, cast from heaven,
Like those angelic youths of old,
Who bum’d for maids of mortal mould,
Bewilder’d left the glorious skies,.
And lost their heaven for woman’s eyes {
Pond girl! nor fiend nor angel he,
Who woos thy young simplicity;
But one of earth's impassion'd sons,
As warm in love, as fierce in ire
As the best heart whose current runs
Full of the Day-God’s living fire!
But quench'd to-night that ardour seems,
And pale his cheek, and -sunk his brow;—
Never before, but in her dreams,
Had she beheld him pale as now:
And those were dreams of troubled sleep,
From which 'twas joy to wake and weep;
Visions, that will not be forgot,
But sadden every waking scene,
Like warning ghosts, that leave the spot
All wither'd where they once have been!
“ How sweetly," said the trembling maid,
Of her own gentle voice afraid,
So long had they in silence stood,
Looking upon that moonlight flood—
“ How sweetly does the moonbeam smile
“ To-night upon yon leafy isle!
“ Oft, in my fancy’s wanderings,
“ I've wish'd that little isle had wings,
“ And we, within its fairy bowers,
“ Were wafted off to seas unknown,
“ Where not a pulse should beat but ours,
“ And we might live, love, die alone!
“ Ear from the cruel and the cold,—
“ Where the bright eyes of angels only
“ Should come around us, to behold
“ A paradise so pure and lonely!
“ Would this be world enough for thee?"—
Playful she turn'd, that he might see
The passing smile her cheek put on;
But when she mark'd how mournfully
His eyes met hers, that smile was gone;
And, bursting into heart-felt tears,
“ Yes, yes," she cried, “ my hourly fears,
“ My dreams have boded all too right—
“We part·—for ever part—to-night!
“ I knew, I knew it could not last—
“ Twas bright, 'twas heavenly, but 'tis past
“ Oh! ever thus, from childhood’s hour,
“ I’ve seen my fondest hopes decay;
“ I never lov’d a tree or flower,
“ But ’twas the first to fade away.
“ I never nurs’d a dear gazelle,
“ To glad me with its soft black eye,
“ But when it came to know me well,
“ And love me, it was sure -to die!
“ Now too—the joy most like divine
“ Of all I ever dreamt or knew,
“ To see thee, hear thee, call thee mine,—
“ Oh misery! must I lose that too ?
“ Yet go—on peril’s brink we meet;—
“ Those frightful rocks—that treacherous sea
“ No, never come again—though sweet,
“ Though heaven, it may be death to thee.
“ Farewell—and blessings on thy way,
“ Where’er thou go’st, beloved stranger!
“ Better to sit and watch that ray,
“ And think thee safe, though far away,
“ Than have thee near me, and in danger!”
“ Danger!—oh, tempt me not to boast—**
The youth exclaim’d—M thou little know’et
“ What he can brave, who, born and nurst
“ In Danger's paths, has dar’d her worst!
“ Upon whose ear the signal-word
“ Of strife and death is hourly breaking;
“ Who sleeps with head upon the sword
“ His fever’d hand must grasp in waking!
“ Danger!—”
• “ Say on—thou fear’st not then,
“ And we may meet—oft meet again ?”
“ Oh! look not so,—beneath the skies
“ I now fear nothing but those eyes.
“ If aught on earth could charm or force
** My spirit from its destin’d course,—
“ If aught could make this soul forget
“ The bond to which its seal is set,
“ Twould be those eyes;—they, only they,
“ Could melt that sacred seal away !
“ But no—'tis fix’d—my awful doom
“ Is fix’d—on this side of the tomb
“ We meet no more—why, why did heaven
“ Mingle two souls that earth has riven,
“ Has rent asunder wide as ours ?
“ Oh Arab maid! as soon the Powers
“ Of Light and Darkness may combine,
“ As I be link'd with thee or thine!
“ Thy Father------”
“ Holy Alla save
“ His grey head from that lightning glance!
“ Thou know’st him not—he loves the brave;
“ Nor lives there under heaven’s expanse
“ One who would prize, would worship thee,
“ And thy bold, spirit, more than he.
“ Oft when, in childhood, I have play’d
“ With the bright falchion by his side,
“ I’ve heard him. swear his lisping maid
“ In time should be a warrior’s bride.
“ And still, whene’er, at Haram hours,
“ I take him cool sherbets and flowers,
“ He tells me, when in playful mood,
** A hero shall my bridegroom be,
“ Since maids are best in battle woo’d,
“ And won mid shouts of victory!
“ Nay, turn not from me—thou alone
“ Art form’d to make both hearts thy own.
“ Go—-join his sacred ranks—thou know'st
“ Th’ unholy strife these Persians wage:—
“ Good Heav'n, that frown!—ev’n now thou glow'st
“ With more than mortal warrior's rage.
“ Haste to the camp by morning's light,
“ And, when that sword is rais'd in fight,
“ Oh still remember Love and I
“ Beneath its shadow trembling lie!
“ One victory o'er those Slaves of Fire,
“ Those impious Ghebers, whom my sire
“ Abhors——"
“ Hold, hold—thy words are death—"
The stranger cried, as wild he flung
His mantle back, and show'd beneath
. The Gheber belt that round him clung—. ®
“ Here, maiden, look—weep—blush to see
“ All that thy sire abhors in me!
“ Yes—I am of that impious race,
“ Those Slaves of Fire who, mom and even,
*	“ They (the Ghebers) lay so much stress on their cushee or girdle, os
not to dare to be an instant without it”—Grose's Voyage.—Le jeune
homme nia d’abord la chose; mais, ayant d£pouill£ de sa robe, et la
large ceinture qu’il portoit comme Ghebr, &c. Sic.—~D'HerbeIot, art.
Agduani.
“ Hail their Creator's dwelling-place
“ Among the living lights of heaven!9
“ Yes—I am of that outcast few,
“ To Iran and to vengeance true,
“ Who curse the hour your Arabs came
“ To desolate our shrines of flame,
“ And swear, before God’s burning eye,
“ To break our country's chains, or die!
“ Thy bigot sire—nay, tremble not—
“ He, who gave birth to those dear eyes,
“ With me is sacred as the spot
“ From which our fires of worship rise!
“ But know—'twas he I sought that night,
“ When, from my watch-rboat on the sea,
“ I caught this turret's glimmering light,
“ And up the rude, rocks desperately
“ Rush'd to my prey—thou know'st the rest—
“ I climb'd the gory vulture’s nest,
“ And found a trembling dove within ·
“ Thine, thine the victory—thine the sin—
*	They suppose the Throne of the Almighty is seated in the sun, and
hence their worship of that luminary.—Hammy.
“ If Love has made one thought his own,
“ That Vengeance claims first—last—alone!
“ Oh! had we never, never met,
“ Or could this heart ev’n now forget
“ How link'd, how bless'd we might have been,
“ Had fate not frown'd so dark between!
“ Hadst thou been born a Persian maid,
** In neighbouring valleys had we dwelt,
“ Through the same fields in childhood play'd,
“ At the same kindling altar knelt,—
“ Then, then, while all those nameless ties,
“ In which the charm of Country lies,
“ Had round our hearts been hourly spun,
“ Till Iran's cause and thine were one;—
“ While in thy lute's awakening sigh
“ I heard the voice of days gone by,
“ And saw in every smile of thine
“ Returning hours of glory shine!—
“ While the wrong’d Spirit of our Land
“ Liv’d, look'd, and spoke her wrongs through thee,—
“ God! who could then this sword withstand ?
“ Its very flash were victory!
“ But now—estrang’d, divorced forever,
“ Far as the grasp of Fate can sever;
“ Our only ties what love has wove,—
“ Faith, friends, and country, sunder’d wide
“ And then, then only, true to love,
“ When false to all that’s dear beside!
“ Thy father Iran’s deadliest foe—
“ Thyself, perhaps, ev’n now—but no—
“ Hate never look’d so lovely yet!
“ No—sacred to thy soul will be
“ The land of him who could forget
“ All but that bleeding land for thee!
“ When other eyes shall see, unmov'd,
“ Her widows mourn, her warriors fall,
“ Thou’lt think how well one Gheber lov’d,
“ And for his sake thou’lt weep for all!
“ But look—”
With sudden start he turn’d
And pointed to the distant wave,
Where lights, like charnel meteors, burn’d
Bluely, as o’er some seaman’s grave;
And fiery darts, at intervals,1
Flew up all sparkling from the main,
1 “ The Mameluks that were in the other boat, when it was dark used
to shoot up a sort of fiery arrows into the cur, which in some measure
resembled lightning or falling stars.*"—Baumgarten.
As if each star, that nightly falls,
Were shooting back to heaven again.
“ My signal-lights!—I must away—
“ Both, both are ruin’d, if I stay.
“ Farewell—sweet life! thou cling’st in vain—
“ Now—Vengeance!—I am thine again."
Fiercely he broke away, nor stopp’d,
Nor look’d—but from the lattice dropp’d
Down mid the pointed crags beneath,
As if he fled from love to death.
While pale and mute young Hinda stood,
Nor mov’d, till in the silent flood
A momentary plunge below
1 Startled her from her trance of woe;—
Shrieking she to the lattice flew,
“ I come—I come—if in that tide
“ Thou sleep’st to-night—I’ll sleep there too,
“ In death’s cold wedlock by thy side.
“ Oh! I would ask no happier bed
“ Than the chill wave my love lies under;—
“ Sweeter to rest together dead,
“ Far sweeter, than to live asunder 
But no—their hour is not yet come—
Again she sees his pinnace fly,
Wafting him fleetly to his home,
Where’er that ill-starr’d home may lie;
And calm and smooth it seem'd to win
Its moonlight way before the wind,
As if it bore all peace within,
Nor left one breaking heart behind!
The Princess, whose heart was sad enough already,
could have wished that Feramorz had chosen a less
melancholy story; as it is only to the happy that tears
are a luxury. Her Ladies, however, were by no means
sorry that love was once more the Poet's theme; for,
φ %
when he spoke of love, they said, his voice was as sweet
as if he had chewed the leaves of that enchanted tree,
which grows over the tomb of the musician, Tan Sein.
Their road all the morning had lain through a very
dreary country;—through valleys, covered with a low
bushy jungle, where, in more than one place, the awful
signal of the bamboo staff, with the white flag at its
top, reminded the traveller that in that very spot the
tiger had made some human creature his victim. It
was therefore with much pleasure that they arrived at
sunset in a safe and lovely glen, and encamped under
one of those holy trees, whose smooth columns and
spreading roofs seem to destine them for natural tem-
ples of religion. Beneath the shade, some pious hands
had erected pillars ornamented with the most beautiful
porcelain, which now supplied the use of mirrors to
the young maidens, as they adjusted their hair in de-
scending from the palankeens. Here while, as usual,
the Princess sat listening anxiously, with Fadladeen
in one of his loftiest moods of criticism by her side, the
young Poet, leaning against a branch of the tree, thus
continued his story:—
The morn has risen clear and calm,
And o’er the Green Sea1 palely shines,
Revealing Bahrein's* groves of palm,
And lighting KishmaV amber vines.
Fresh smell the shores of Araby,
While breezes from the Indian sea
Blow round SelamaV sainted cape,
And curl the shining flood beneath,—
Whose waves are rich with many a grape,
And cocoa-nut and flowery wreath,
Which pious seamen, as they pass’d,
Have tow’rd that holy head-land cast—
Oblations to the Genii there
For gentle skies and breezes fair!
■ The Persian Gulf.—“ To dive for pearls in the Green Sea, or Per-
sian Gulf.”—Sir W. Jonet.
*	Islands in the Gulf.
5 Or Seletneh, the genuine name of the headland at the entrance of the
Gulf, commonly called Cape Musseldom. “ The Indians, when they pass
the promontory, throw cocoa-nuts, fruits, or flowers, into the sea, to secure
a propitious voyage."—Morier.
The nightingale now b&ids her flight
From the high trees, where all the night
She sung so sweet, with none to listen;
And hides her from the morning star
Where thickets of pomegranate glisten
In the clear dawn,—bespangled o'er
With dew, whose night-drops would not stain
The best and brightest scimitar*
That ever youthful Sultan wore
On the first morning of his reign!
And see—the Sun himself!—on wings
Of glory up the East he springs.
Angel of Light! who from the time
Those heavens began their march sublime,
Has first of all the starry choir
Trod in his Maker’s steps of fire!
Where are the days, thou wondrous sphere,
When Iran, like a sun-flower, turn’d
To meet that eye where’er it bum’d ?—
When, from the banks of Bendemeer
« In speaking of the climate of Shiraz, Francklin says, “ the dew is of
such a pure nature, that, if the brightest scimitar should be exposed to it
all night, it would not receive the least rust."1
To the nut-groves of Samarcand
Thy temples flam'd o'er all the land ?
Where are they ? ask the shades of them
Who, on Cadessia’s5 bloody plains,
Saw fierce invaders pluck the gem
From Iran's broken diadem,
And bind her ancient faith in chains:—
Ask the poor exile, cast alone
On foreign shores, unlov’d, unknown,
Beyond the Caspian’s Iron Gates,6
Or on the snowy Mossian mountains,
Far from his beauteous land of dates,
Her jasmine bowers and sunny fountains!
Yet happier so than if he trod
His own belov'd but blighted sod,
Beneath a despot stranger's nod;—
Oh! he would rather houseless roan)
Where Freedom and his God may lead,
Than be the sleekest slave at home
That crouches to the conqueror's creed!
*	The place where the Persians were finally defeated by the Arabs, and
their ancient monarchy destroyed.
*	Derbend.—“ Les Turcs appellent cette ville Demir Capi, Porte de
Fer; ce sont les Caspise Portae des anciens.”—D'Herbelot.
Is Iran’s pride then gone for ever,
Quench’d with the flame in Mithra’s caves?—
No—she has sons that never—never—
Will stoop to be the Moslem’s slaves,
While heav’n has light or earth has graves.
Spirits of fire, that brood not long,
But flash resentment back for wrong;
And hearts-where, slow but deep, the seeds
Of vengeance ripen into deeds,
Till, in some treacherous hour of calm,
They burst, like Zeilan’s giant palm,7
.Whose buds fly open with a sound
That shakes the pigmy forests round!
Yes, Emir ! he, who scal’d that tower,
And, could he reach thy slumbering breast,
Would teach thee, in a Gheber’s power
How safe ev’n tyrant heads may rest—
7	The Talpot or Talipot tree. “ This beautiful palm-tree, which
grows in the heart of the forests, may be classed among the loftiest trees,
and becomes still higher when on the point of bursting forth from its leafy
summit. The sheath which then envelopes the flower is very large,
and, when it bursts, makes an explosion like the report of a cannon."—
Tkunberg.
Is one of many, brave as he,
Who loathe thy haughty race and thee;
Who, though they know the strife is vain,
Who, though they know the riven chain
Snaps but to enter in the heart
Of him who rends its links apart,
Yet dare the issue,—blest to be
Ev’n for one bleeding moment free,
And die in pangs of liberty !
Thou know’st them well—’tis some moons since
Thy turban’d troops and blood-red flags,
x Thou satrap of a bigot Prince!
Have swarm’d among these Greeri-Sea crags;
Yet here, ev’n here, a sacred band,
Ay, in the portal of that land
Thou, Arab, dar’st to call thy own,
Their spears across thy path have thrown.
Here—ere the winds half wing’d thee O’er—
Rebellion brav’d thee from the shore.
Rebellion! foul, dishonouring word,
Whose wrongful blight so oft has stain’d
The holiest cause that tongue or sword
Of mortal ever lost or gain’d.
How many a spirit, born to bless,
Has sunk beneath that withering name,
Whom but a day's, an hour’s success
Had wafted to eternal fame!
As exhalations, when they burst
From the warm earth, if chill’d at first,
If check’d in soaring from the plain,
Darken to fogs and sink again;—
But, if they once triumphant spread
Their wings above the mountain-head,
Become enthron’d in upper air,
And turn to sun-bright glories there!
And who is he, that wields the might
Of Freedom on the Green-Sea brink,
Before whose sabre’s dazzling light
The eyes of Yemen’s warriors wink ?
Who comes embower’d in the spears
Of Kerman’s hardy mountaineers?—
Those mountaineers that truest, last,
Cling to their country’s ancient rites,
As if that God, whose eyelids cast
Their closing gleam on Iran's heights,
Among her snowy mountains threw
The last light of his worship too!
Tis Ha fed—name of fear, whose sound
Chills like the muttering of a charm;—■
Shout but that awful name around,
And palsy shakes the manliest arm.
Tis Ha fed, most accurst and dire
(So rank’d by Moslem hate and ire)
Of all the rebel Sons of Fire!
Of whose malign, tremendous power
The Arabs, at their mid-watch hour,
Such tales of fearful wonder tell,
That each affrighted centinel
Pulls down his cowl upon his eyes,
Lest Hafed in the midst should rise!
A man, they say, of monstrous birth,
A mingled race of flame and earth,
Sprung from those old, enchanted kings,'
Who in their fairy helms, of yore,
8	Tahmuras, and other ancient Kings of Persia; whose adventures in
Fairy.Land among the Peris and Dives may be found in Richardson’s
curious Dissertation. The griffin Simoorgh, they say, took some feathers
from her breast for Tahmuras, with which he adorned his helmet, and
transmitted them afterwards to his descendants.
A feather from the mystic wings
Of the Simoorgh resistless wore;
And gifted by the Fiends of Fire,
Who groan'd to see their shrines expire,
With charms that, all in vain withstood,
Would drown the Koran's light in blood!
Such were the tales, that won belief,
And such the colouring fancy gave
To a young, warm and dauntless Chief,—
One who, no more than mortal brave,
Fought for the land his soul ador'd,
For happy homes and altars free,
His only talisman, the sword,—
His only spell-word, Liberty!
One of that ancient hero line,
Along whose glorious current shine
Names, that have sanctified their blood;
As Lebanon's small mountain-flood
Is render'd holy by the ranks
Of sainted cedars on its banks!9
9 This rivulet, says Dandini, is called the Holy River from the “ cedar-
saints” among which it rises.
’Twas not for him to crouch the knee
Tam&y to Moslem tyranny;—
’Twas not for him, whose soul was cast
In the bright mould of ages past,
Whose melancholy spirit, fed
With all the glories of the dead,
Though fram’d for Iran’s happiest years,
Was bom among her chains and tears!—
’Twas not for him to swell the crowd
Of slavish heads, that shrinking bowed
Before the Moslem, as he pass’d,
Like shrubs beneath the poison-blast—
No—far he fled—indignant fled
The pageant of his country’s shame;
While every tear her children shed
Fell on his soul, like drops of flame;
And, as a lover hails the dawn
Of a first smile, so welcom’d he
The sparkle of the first sword drawn
For vengeance and for liberty !
But vain was valour—vain the flower
Of Kerman, in that deathful hour,
Against Al Hassan’s whelming power.—
In vain they met him, helm to helm,
Upon the threshold of that realm
He came in bigot pomp to sway,
And with their corpses block’d his way—
In vain—for every lance they rais’d
Thousands around the conqueror blaz’d;
For every arm that lin’d their shore,
Myriads of slaves were wafted o’er,—-
A bloody, bold and countless crowd,
Before whose swarm as fast they bow’d
As dates beneath the locust-cloud!
There stood—but one short league away
From old Harmozia’s sultry bay—
A rocky mountain, o’er the Sea
Of Oman beetling awfully.
A last and solitary link
Of those stupendous chains that reach
From the broad Caspian’s reedy brink
Down winding to the Green-Sea beach.
Around its base the bare rocks stood,
Like naked giants, in the flood,
As if to guard the Gulf across;—
While, on its peak that brav’d the sky,
A ruin’d Temple tower’d, so high
That oft the sleeping albatross1
Struck the wild ruins with her wing,
And from her cloud-rock’d slumbering
Started—to find man’s dwelling there
In her own silent fields of air!
Beneath, terrific caverns gave
“Dark welcome to each stormy wave
That dash’d, like midnight revellers, in;—
And such the strange, mysterious din
At times throughout those caverns roll’d,—
And such the fearful wonders told
Of restless sprites imprison’d there,
That bold were Moslem, who would dare,
At twilight hour, to steer his skiff
Beneath the Gheber’s lonely cliff.
On the land side, those towers sublime,
That seem’d above the grasp of Time,
Were sever’d from the haunts of men
By a wide, deep and wizard glen,
1 These birds sleep in the air. They are most common about the Cape
of Good Hope.
So fathomless, so full of gloom,
No eye could pierce the void between ;
It seem'd a place where Gholes might come
With their foul banquets from the tomb,
And in its caverns feed unseen.
Like distant thunder, from below,
The sound of many torrents came;
Too deep for eye or ear to know
If 'twere the sea's imprison'd flow,
Or floods of ever-restless flame.
For each ravine, each rocky spire
Of that vast mountain stood on fire;8
And, though for ever past the days,
When God was worshipp'd in the blaze
That from its lofty altar shone,—
Though fled the priests, the votaries gone,
Still did the mighty flame burn on
Through chance and change, through good and ill,
Like its own God's eternal will,
Deep, constant, bright, unquenchable!
Thither the vanquish'd Hafed led
His little army's last remains;—
*	The Ghebers generally built their temples over subterraneous fires.
“ Welcome, terrific glen!” he said,
“ Thy gloom, that Elbis’ self might dread,
“ Is heav’n to him who flies from chains!”
O’er a dark, narrow bridge-way, known
To him and to his Chiefs alone,
They cross’d the chasm and gain’d the towers;—
“ This home,” he cried, “ at least is ours—
“ Here we may bleed, unmock’d by hymns
“ Of Moslem triumph o’er our head;
“ Here we may fall, nor leave our limbs
“ To quiver to the Moslem’s tread.
“ Stretch’d on this rock, while vultures’ beaks
“ Are whetted on our yet warm cheeks,
“ Here,—happy that no tyrant’s eye
“ Gloats on our torments—we may die!”
’Twas night when to those towers they came,
And gloomily the fitful flame,
That from the ruin’d altar broke,
Glar’d on his features, as he spoke:—
“ ’Tis o’er—what men could do, we’ve done—
“ If Iran will look tamely on,
“ And see her priests, her warriors driven
“ Before a sensual bigot's nod,
“ A wretch, who takes his lusts to heaven,
“ And makes a pander of his God!
“ If her proud sons, her high-born souls,
“ Men, in whose veins—oh last disgrace!
“ The blood of Zal and Rustam 3 rolls,
“ If they will court this upstart race,
“ And turn from Mithra’s ancient ray,
“ To kneel at shrines of yesterday !
“ If they will crouch to Iran’s foes,
“ Why, let them—till the land’s despair
“ Cries out to heav’n, and bondage grows
“ Too vile for ev’n the vile to bear!
“ Till shame at last, long hidden, burns
“ Their inmost core, and conscience turns
“ Each coward tear the slave lets fall
“ Back on his heart in drops of gall!
“ But here, at least, are arms unchain’d,
“ And souls that thraldom never stain’d;—
“ This spot, at least, no foot of slave
“ Or satrap ever yet profan’d;	>
“ And, though but few—though fast the wave
“ Of life is ebbing from our veins,
“ Enough for vengeance still remains.
s Ancient heroes of Persia. “ Among the Guebres there are some, who
boast their descent from Rustam”—-Stephen's Persia.
“ As panthers, after set of sun,
“ Rush from the roots of Lebanon
“ Across the dark sea-robber's way,4
“ Well bound upon our startled prey;—
“ And when some hearts that proudest swell
“ Have felt our falchion’s last farewell;
“ When Hope’s expiring throb is o’er,
“ And ev’n Despair can prompt no more,
“ This spot shall be the sacred grave
“ Of the last few who, vainly brave,
“ Die for the land they cannot save!“
His Chiefs stood round—each shining blade
Upon the broken altar laid—
And though so wild and desolate
Those courts, where once the Mighty sate;
Nor longer on those mouldering towers
Was seen the feast of fruits and flowers,
With which of old the Magi fed
The wandering Spirits of their Dead;5
4	V. Russel’s account of the panthers attacking travellers in the night on
the sea-shore about the roots of Lebanon.
5	“ Among other ceremonies the Magi used to place upon the tops of
Though neither priest nor rites were there,
Nor charmed leaf of pure pomegranate;6
Nor hymn, nor censer’s fragrant air,
Nor symbol of their worshipp'd planet;7
Yet the same God that heard their sires
Heard them, while on that altar's fires
They swore the latest, holiest deed
Of the few hearts, still left to bleed,
Should be, in Iran’s injur’d name,
To die upon that Mount of Flame—
The last of all her patriot line,
Before her last untrampled Shrine!
high towers various kinds of rich viands, upon which it was supposed the
Peris and the spirits of their departed heroes regaled themselves.”—
Richardson.
e In the ceremonies of the Ghebers round their Fire, as described by
Lord, “ the Daroo,” he says, “ giveth them water to drink, and a
pomegranate leaf to chew in the mouth, to cleanse them from inward
undeanness.”
7	“ Early in the morning, they (the Parsees or Ghebers at Oulam) go
in crowds to pay their devotions to the Sun, to whom upon all the altars
there are spheres consecrated, made by magic, resembling the circles of the
sun, and when the sun rises, these orbs seem to be inflamed, and to turn
round with a great noise. They have every one a censer in their hands,
and offer incense to the sun”—Rabbi Benjamin.
Brave, suffering souls! they little knew
How many a tear their injuries drew
From one meek heart, one gentle foe,
Whom Love first touch’d with others’ woe—
Whose life, as free from thought as sin,
Slept like a lake, till Love threw in
His talisman, and woke the tide,
And spread its trembling circles wide.
Once, £mir ! thy unheeding child,
Mid all this havoc, bloom’d and smil'd,—
Tranquil as on some battle-plain
The Persian lily shines and towers,
Before the combat’s reddening stain
Has fall’n upon her golden flowers.
Light-hearted maid, unaw’d, unmov’d,
While heav’n but spar’d the sire she lov’d,
Once at thy evening tales of blood
Unlistening and aloof she stood—
And oft, when thou hast pac’d along
Thy Haram halls with furious heat,
Hast thou not curs’d her cheerful song,
That came across thee, calm and sweet,
Like lutes of angels, touch’d so near
« Hell’s confines, that the damn’d can hear!
Ear other feelings Love has brought—
Her soul all flame, her brow all sadness,
She now has but the one dear thought,
And thinks that o’er, almost to madness!
Oft doth her sinking heart recal
His words—“ for my sake weep for all
And bitterly, as day on day
Of rebel carnage fast succeeds,
She weeps a lover snatch’d away
In every Gheber wretch that bleeds.
There’s not a sabre meets her eye,
But with his life-blood seems to swim;
There’s not an arrow wings the sky,
But fancy turns its point to him.
No more she brings with footstep light
Al Hassan’s falchion for the fight;
And,—had he look’d with clearer sight,
Had not the mists, that ever rise
From a foul spirit, dimm’d his eyes—
He would have mark’d her shuddering frame,
When from the field of blood he came,
The faltering speech—the look estrang’d—
Voice, step, and life, and beauty chang’d—
He would have mark’d all this, and known
Such change is wrought by Love alone!
Ah! not the Love, that should have bless’d
So young, so innocent a breast;
Not the pure, open, prosperous Love,
That, pledg’d on earth and seal’d above,
Grows in the world’s approving eyes,
In friendship’s smile and home’s caress,
Collecting all the heart’s sweet ties
Into one knot of happiness!
No, Hinda, no—thy fatal flame
Is nurs’d in silence, sorrow, shame_____
A passion, without hope or pleasure,
In thy soul’s darkness buried deep,
It lies, like some ill-gotten treasure,—
Some idol, without shrine or name,
O’er which its pale-ey’d votaries keep
Unholy watch, while others sleep!
Seven nights have darken’d Oman’s Sea,
Since last, beneath the moonlight ray,
She saw his light oar rapidly
Hurry her Gheber’s bark away,—
And still she goes, at midnight hour,
To weep alone in that high bower,
And watch, and look along the deep
For him whose smiles first made her weep,—
But watching, weeping, all was vain,
She never saw that bark again.
The owlet’s solitary cry,
The night-hawk, flitting darkly by,
And oft the hateful carrion-bird,
Heavily flapping his clogg’d wing,
Which reek’d with that day’s banquetting—
Was all she saw, was all she heard.
’Tis the eighth mom—Al Hassan’s brow
Is brighten’d with unusual joy—
What mighty mischief glads him now,
Who never smiles but to destroy ?
The sparkle upon Herkend’s Sea,
When tost at midnight furiously,8
Tells not of wreck and ruin nigh,
More surely tljan that smiling eye!
8	“ It is observed, with respect to the Sea of Herkend, that when it is
tossed by tempestuous winds it sparkles like fire.”—Travels of two Mo-
hammedans.
“ Up, daughter, up—the Kern as9 breath
“ Has blown a blast would waken death,
“ And yet thou sleep’st—up, child, and see
“ This blessed day for heaven and me,
“ A day more rich in Pagan blood
“ Than ever flash’d o’er Oman’s flood.
“ Before another dawn shall shine,
“ His head—heart—limbs—will all be mine;
“ This very night his blood shall steep
“ These hands all over ere I sleep!’’—
“ His blood !” she faintly scream’d—her mind
Still singling one from all mankind—;
“ Yes—spite of his ravines and towers,
“ Ha fed, my child, this night is ours.
“ Thanks to all-conquering treachery,
“ Without whose aid the links accurst,
“ That bind these impious slaves, would be
“ Too strong for Alla’s self to burst!
“ That rebel fiend, whose blade has spread
“ My path with piles of Moslem dead,
•	A kind of trumpet;—it “ was that used by Tamerlane, the sound of
which is described as uncommonly dreadful, and so loud as to be heard at
the distance of several miles.'"—Richardson.
“ Whose baffling spells had almost driven .
“ Back from their course the Swords of Heaven,
“ This night, with all his band, shall know
“ How deep an Arab's steel can go,
“ When God and Vengeance speed the blow.
“ And—Prophet!—by that holy wreath
“ Thou wor’st on Ohod’s field of death,1
“ I swear, for every sob that parts
“ In anguish from these heathen hearts,
“ A gem from Persia's plunder’d mines
“ Shall glitter on thy Shrine of Shrines.
“ But ha!—she sinks—that look so wild—
“ Those livid lips—my child, my child,
“ This life of blood befits not thee,
“ And thou must back to Araby.
“ Ne’er had I risk’d thy timid sex
“ In scenes that man himself might dread,
“ Had I not hop'd our every tread
“ Would be on prostrate Persian necks—
“ Curst race, they offer swords instead!
1 “ Mohammed had two helmets, an interior and exterior one; the
latter of which, called A1 Mawashah, the fillet, wreath, or wreathed gar-
land, he wore at the battle of Ohod.”—Universal History.
“ But cheer thee, maid,—the wind, that now
“ Is blowing o'er thy feverish brow,
“ To-day shall waft thee from the shore;
“ And, ere a drop of this night's gore
“ Have time to chill in yonder towers,
“ Thou’lt see thy own sweet Arab bowers!"
His bloody boast was all too true—
There lurk'd one wretch among the few
Whom Hafed's eagle eye could count
Around him on that Fiery Mount,—
One miscreant, who for gold betray'd
The path-way through the valley’s shade
To those high towers, where Freedom stood
In her last hold of flame and blood.
Left on the field last dreadful night,
When, sallying from their Sacred Height,
The Ghebers fought hope's farewell fight,
He lay—but died not with the brave;
That sun, which should have gilt his grave,
Saw him a traitor and a slave;—
And, while the few, who thence return’d
To their high rocky fortress, mourn’d
For him among the matchless dead
They left behind on glory’s bed,
He liv’d, and, in the face of mom,
Laugh’d them and Faith and Heaven to scorn
Oh for a tongue to curse the slave,
Whose treason, like a deadly blight,
Comes o’er the councils of the brave,
And blasts them in their hour of might!
May Life’s unblessed cup for him
Be drugg’d with treacheries to the brim,—
With hopes, that but allure to fly,
With joys, that vanish while he sips,
Like Dead-Sea fruits, that tempt the eye,
But turn to ashes on the lips!
His country’s curse, his children’s shame,
Outcast of virtue, peace and fame,
May he, at last, with lips of flame
On the parch'd desert thirsting die,—
While lakes that shone in mockery nigh
Are fading off, untouch’d, untasted,
Like the once glorious hopes he blasted !
And, when from earth his spirit flies,
Just Prophet, let the damn’d-one dwell
Full in the sight of Paradise,
Beholding heaven, and feeling hell!
Lalla Rookh had had a dream the night before,
which, in spite of the impending fate of poor Ha fed,
made her heart more than usually cheerful during the
morning, and gave her cheeks all the freshened anima-
tion of a flower that the Bid-musk has just passed over.
She fancied that she was sailing on that Eastern Ocean,
where the sea-gipsies, who live for ever on the water,
enjoy a perpetual summer in wandering from isle to
isle, when she saw a small gilded bark approaching her.
It was like one of those boats which the Maldivian
islanders annually send adrift, at the mercy of winds
and waves, loaded with perfumes, flowers, and odori-
ferous wood, as an offering to the Spirit whom they
call King of the Sea. At first, this little bark appeared
to be empty, but, on coming nearer----------
She had proceeded thus far in relating the dream to
her Ladies, when Feramorz appeared at the door of
the pavilion. In his presence, of course, every thing
else was forgotten, and the continuance of the story
was instantly requested by all. Fresh wood of aloes
was set to burn in the cassolets;—the violet sherbets
were hastily handed round, and, after a short prelude
on his lute, in the pathetic measure of Nava, which is
always used to express the lamentations of absent lovers,
the Poet thus continued :—
The day is lowering—stilly black
Sleeps the grim wave, while heaven's rack.
Dispers'd and wild, 'twixt earth and sky
Hangs like a shatter’d canopy!
There's not a cloud in that blue plain
But tells of storm to come or past;—
Here, flying loosely as the mane
Of a young war-horse in the blast ;—
There, roll'd in masses dark and swelling,
As proud to be the thunder's dwelling!
While some, already burst and riven,
Seem melting down the verge of heaven;
As though the infant storm had rent
The mighty womb that gave him birth,
And, having swept the firmament,
Was now in fierce career for earth.
On earth 'twas yet all calm around,
A pulseless silence, dread, profound,
More awful than the tempest's sound.
The diver steer'd for Or mu s’ bowers,
And moor’d his skiff till calmer hours;
The sea-birds, with portentous screech,
Flew fast to land;—upon the beach
The pilot oft had paus'd, with glance
Turn’d upward to that wild expanse;
And all was boding, drear and dark
As her own soul, when Hinda’s bark
Went slowly from the Persian shore—
No music timed her parting oar,1
Nor friends upon the lessening strand
Linger’d, to wave the unseen hand,
Or speak the farewell, heard no more;—
But lone, unheeded, from the bay
The vessel takes its mournful way,
Like some ill-destin’d bark that steers
In silence through the Gate of Tears.8
And where was stern Al Hassan then?
Could not that saintly scourge of men
1	“ The Easterns used to set out on their longer voyages with music.”*—
Harmer.
9	“ The Gate of Tears, the straits or passage into the Red Sea, com-
monly called Babelmandel. It received this name from the old Arabians,
on account of the danger of the navigation, and the number of shipwrecks
by which it was distinguished; which induced them to consider as dead,
and to wear mourning for all who had the boldness to hazard the passage
through it into the Ethiopic ocean.”—Richardson.
From blood-shed and devotion spare
One minute for a farewell there ?
No—close within, in changeful fits
Of cursing and of prayer, he sits
In savage loneliness to brood
Upon the coming night of blood,
With that keen, second-scent of death,
By which the vulture snuffs his food
In the still warm and living breath!3
While o’er the wave his weeping daughter
Is wafted from these scenes of slaughter,—
As a young bird of Βαβυιοιϊ, 4
Let loose to tell of victory won,
Flies home, with wing, ah! not nnstain’d
By the red hands that held her chain’d.
And does the long-left home she seeks
Light up no gladness on her cheeks ?
The flowers she nurs’d—the well-known groves,
Where oft in dreams her spirit roves—
5	“ I have been told that whensoever'an animal falls down dead, one or
more vultures, unseen before, instantly appear.”—Pennant.
*	“ They fasten some writing to the wings of a Bagdat, or Babylonian
pigeon.”—Travels of certain Englishmen.
Once more to see her dear gazelles
Come bounding with their silver bells;
Her birds’ new plumage to behold,
And the gay, gleaming fishes count,
She left, all filleted with gold,
Shooting around their jasper fount.—s
Her little garden mosque to see,
And once again, at evening hour,
To tell her ruby rosary,
In her own sweet acacia, bower.—
Can these delights, that wait her now,
Call up no sunshine on her brow ?
No—silent, from her train apart,—
As if ev’n now she felt at heart
The chill of her approaching doom,—
She sits, all lovely in her gloom
As a pale Angel of. the Grave;
And o’er the wide, tempestuous wave,
Looks, with a shudder, to those towers,
Where, in a few short awfid hours,
*	“ The Empress of Jehan-Guire used to divert herself with feeding
tame fish in her canals, some of which were many years afterwards known
by fillets of gold, which she caused to be put round them”—Harris.
Blood, blood, in steaming tides shall run,
Foul incense for to-morrow’s sun!
“ Where art thou, glorious stranger! thou,
“ So lov’d, so lost, where art thou now ?
“ Foe—Gheber—infidel—whate’er
“ Th’ unhallow’d name thou’rt doom’d to bear,
“ Still glorious—still to this fond heart
“ Dear as its blood, whate’er thou art!
“ Yes—Alla, dreadful Alla ! yes—
“ If there be wrong, be crime in this,
“ Let the black waves, that round us roll,
“ Whelm me this instant, ere my soul,
“ Forgetting faith,—home,—father,—all—
“ Before its earthly idol fall,
“ Nor worship ev’n Thyself above him.—
“ For oh! so wildly do I love him,
“ Thy Paradise itself were dim,
“ And joyless, if not shar’d with him!”
Her hands were clasp’d—her eyes upturn’d,
Dropping their tears like moonlight rain;
And, though her lip, fond raver! burn’d
With words of passion, bold, profane,
Yet was there light around her brow,
A holiness in those dark eyes,
Which showed—though wandering earthward now,—
Her spirit’s home was in the skies.
Yes—for a spirit, pure as hers,
Is always pure, ev’n while it errs ;
As sunshine, broken in the rill,
Though turn’d astray* is sunshine still!
So wholly had her mind forgot
All thoughts but one, she heeded not
The rising storm—the wave that cast
A moment’s midnight, as it pass’d—
Nor heard the frequent shout, the tread
Of gathering tumult o’er her head—
Clash’d swords, and tongues that seem’d to vie
With the rude riot of the sky.—
But hark!—that war-whoop on the deck—
That crash, as if each engine there,
Mast, sails and all were gone ta wreck»
Mid yells and stampings of despair!
Merciful heaven! what can it be ?
’Tis not the storm, though fearfully
The ship has shuddered as she rode
O’er mountain waves —“ Forgive me, God I
“ Forgive me”—shriek’d the maid, and knelt,
Trembling' all over,—for she felt
As if her judgment-hour was near;
While crouching round, half dead with fear,
Her hand-maids clung, nor breath’d, nor stirr’d—
When, hark!—a second crash—a third—
And now, as if a bolt of thunder
Had riv’n the labouring planks asunder,
The deck falls in—what horrors then!
Blood, waves and tackle, swords and men
Come mix’d together through the chasm;—
Some wretches in their dying spasm
Still fighting on—and some that call
“ For God and Iran !” as they fall!
Whose was the hand that turn’d away
The perils of th’ infuriate fray,
And snatch’d her breathless from beneath
This wilderment of wreck and dfcath ?
She knew not—for a faintness came
Chill o’er her, and her sinking frame
Amid the ruins of that hour
Lay, like a pale and scorched flower,
Beneath the red volcano’s shower!
But oh! the sights and sounds of dread
That shock’d her, ere her senses fled!
The yawning deck—the crowd that strove
Upon the tottering planks above—
The sail, whose fragments, shivering o’er
The strugglers’ heads, all dash’d with gore,
Flutter’d like bloody flags—the clash
Of sabres, and the lightning’s flash
Upon their blades, high toss’d about
Like meteor brands6—as if throughout
The elements one fury ran,
One general rage, that left a doubt
Which was the fiercer, Heav’n or Man!
Once too—but no—it could not be—
’Twas fancy all—yet once she thought,
While yet her fading eyes could see,
High on the ruin’d deck she caught
A glimpse of that unearthly form,
That glory of her soul,—ev’n then,
*	The meteors that Pliny calls “ faces.”
Amid the whirl of wreck and storm,
Shining above his fellow men,
As, on some black and troublous night,
The Star of Egypt, T whose proud light
Never has beam'd on those who rest
In the White Islands of the West,8
Burns through the storm with looks of flame
That put heav’n’s cloudier eyes to shame!
But no—'twas but the minute's dream—
A fantasy—and ere the scream
Had half-way pass'd her pallid lips,
A death-like swoon, a chill eclipse
Of soul and sense its darkness spread
Around her, and she sunk, as dead!
How calm, how beautiful comes on
The stilly hour, when storms are gone;
When warring winds have died away,
And clouds, beneath the glancing ray,
Melt off, and leave the land and sea
Sleeping in bright tranquillity,—
7 “ The brilliant Canopus, unseen in European climaie*."—Brown.
•	V. Wilford's learned Essays on the Sacred Isles in the West
Fresh as if Day again were born,
Again upon the lap of Morn!
When the light blossoms, rudely torn
And scatter’d at the whirlwind’s will,
Hang floating in the pure air still,
Filling it all with precious balm,
In gratitude for this sweet calm;—
And every drop the thunder-showers
Have left upon the grass and flowers
Sparkles, as ’twere that lightning-gem9
Whose liquid flame is born of them!
When, ’stead of one unchanging breeze,
There blow a thousand gentle airs,
And each a different perfume bears,—
As if the loveliest plants and trees
Had vassal breezes of their own
To watch and wait on them alone,
And waft no other breath than theirs!
9	A precious stone of the Indies, called by the ancients Ceraunium,
because it was supposed to be found in places where thunder had fallen.
Tertullian says it has a glittering appearance, as if there had been fire in it;
and the author of the Dissertation in Harris's Voyages'supposes it to be
the opal.
When the blue waters rise and fall,
In sleepy sunshine mantling all;
And ev’n that swell .the tempest leaves
Is like the full and silent heaves
Of lovers’ hearts, when newly blest,
Too newly to be quite at rest!
Such was the golden hour, that broke
Upon the world, when Hinda woke
From her long trance, and heard around
No motion but the water's sound
Rippling against the vessel’s side,
As slow it mounted o’er the tide.—
But where is she ?—her eyes are dark,
Are wilder’d still—is this the bark,
The same, that from Harmozia’s bay
Bore her at morn—whose bloody way
The sea-dog tracks ?—no—strange and new
Is all that meets her wondering view.
Upon a galliot’s deck she lies,
Beneath no rich pavilion’s shade,
No plumes to fan her sleeping eyes,
Nor jasmin on her pillow laid.
But the rude litter, roughly spread
With war-cloaks, is her homely bed,
And shawl and sash, on javelins hung,
For awning o’er her head are flung.
Shuddering she look’d around—there lay
A group of warriors in the sun
Resting their limbs, as for that day
Their ministry of death were done.
Some gazing on the drowsy sea,
Lost in unconscious reverie;
And some, who seem'd but ill to brook
That sluggish calm, with many a look
To the slack sail impatient cast,
As loose it flagg’d around the mast.
Blest Alla ! who shall save her now ?
There’s not in all that warrior-band
One Arab sword, one turban’d brow
From her own Faithful Moslem land.
Their garb—the leathern belt1 that wraps
Each yellow vest2—that rebel hue—.
1 D'Herbeht, Art. Agduani.
*	“ The Guebres are known by a dark yellow colour, which the men
affect in their clothes.”— Thevenot*
The Tartar fleece ύροη their caps—*
Yes—yes—her fears are all too true,
And Heav'n hath, in this dreadful hour,
Abandon'd her to Ha fed’s power;—
Hafed, the Gheber!—at the thought
Her very heart’s blood chills within;
He, whom her soul was hourly taught
To loathe, as some foul fiend of sin,
Some minister, whom Hell had sent
To spread her blast, where’er he went,
And fling, as o’er our earth he trod,
His shadow betwixt man and God t
And she is now his captive,—thrown
In his fierce hands, alive, alone;
His the infuriate band she sees,
All infidels—all enemies 1
What was the daring hope that then
Cross'd her like lightning, as again,
With boldness, that despair had lent,
She darted through that armed crowd
A look so searching, so intent,
That ev'n the sternest warrior bow’d
3	“ The Kolah, or cap, worn by the Persians, is made of the skin of the
sheep of Tartary.”— Waring.
Abash’d, when he her glances caught,
As if he guess'd whose form they sought.
But no—she sees him not—'tis gone,—
The vision, that before her shone
Through all the maze of blood and storm,
Is fled—'twas but a phantom form—
One of those passing, rainbow dreams,
Half light, half shade, which Fancy's beams
Paint on the fleeting mists that roll
In trance or slumber round the soul!
But now the bark, with livelier bound,
Scales the blue wave^he crew’s in motion*—
The oars are out, and with light sound
Break the bright mirror of the ocean,
Scattering its brilliant fragments round.
And now she sees—with horror sees
Their course is tow’rd that mountain hold,—
Those towers, that make her life-hlood freeze,
Where Mecca's-, godless enemies
Lie, like beleaguer'd scorpions, roll’d
In their last deadly , venomous fold!
Amid the’ illumin’d land and flood
Sunless that mighty mountain stood ;
Save where, above its awful head,
There shone a flaming cloud, blood-red,
As ’twere the flag of destiny
Hung out to mark where death would be!
Had her bewilder’d mind the power
Of thought in this terrific hour,
She well might marvel where ot how
Man’s foot could scale that mountain’s brow;
Since ne’er had Arab heard or known
Of path but through the glen alone.—
But every thought is lost in fear,
When, as their bounding bark drew near
The craggy base, she felt the waves
Hurry them tow’rd those dismal caves
That from the Deep in windings pass
Beneath that Mount's volcanic mass—
And loud a voice on deck commands
To lower the mast and light the brands!—
Instantly o’er the dashing tide
Within a cavern’s mouth they glide,
Gloomy as that eternal Porch,
Through which departed spirits go
Not ev’n the flare of Iprand and torch
Its flickering light could further throw
Than the thick flood that boil’d below.
Silent they floated—as if each
Sat breathless, and too aw’d for speech
In that dark chasm, where even sound
Seem’d dark,—so sullenly around
The goblin echoes of the cave
Mutter’d it o’er the long black wave,
As ’twere some secrets of the grave!
But, soft—they pause—the current turns
Beneath them from its onward track;—
Some mighty, unseen barrier spurns
The vexed tide, all foaming, back,
And scarce the oar’s redoubled force
Can stem the eddy’s whirling force;—
When, hark!—some desperate foot has sprung
Among the rocks—the chain is flung—
The oars are up—the grapple clings,
And the toss’d bark in moorings swings.
Just then, a day-beam through the shade
Broke tremulous—but, ere the maid
Can see from whence the brightness steals,
Upon her brow she shuddering feels
A viewless hand, that promptly ties
A bandage round her burning eyes;
While the rude litter where she lies,
Uplifted by the warrior throng,
O’er the steep rocks is borne along.
Blest power of sunshine! genial Day,
What balm, what life are in thy ray !
To feel thee is such real bliss,
That had the world no joy but this,
To sit in sunshine calm and sweet,—
It were a world too exquisite
For man to leave it for the gloom,
The deep, cold shadow of the tomb!
Ev’n Hinda, though she saw not where
Or whither wound the perilous road,
Yet knew by that awakening air,
Which suddenly around her glow’d,
That they had ris'n from darkness then,
And breath’d the sunny world again J
But soon this balmy freshness fled—
For now the steepy labyrinth led
Througli damp and gloom—’mid crash of boughs,
And fall of loosen’d crags that rouse
The leopard from his hungry sleep,
Who, starting, thinks each crag a prey,
And long is heard from steep to steep,
Chasing them down their thundering way!
The jackal’s cry—the distant moan
Of the hyaena, fierce and lone;—
And that eternal, saddening sound
Of torrents in the glen beneath,
As ’twere the ever-dark Profound
That rolls beneath the Bridge of Death!
All, all is fearful—ev’n to see
To gaze on those terrific things
She now but blindly hears, would be
Relief to her imaginings!
Since never yet was shape so dread,
But Fancy, thus in darkness thrown,
And by such sounds of horror fed,
Could frame more dreadful of her own.
But does she dream ? has Fear again
Perplex’d the workings of her brain,
Or did a voice, all music, then
Come from the gloom, low whispering near—
“ Tremble not, love, thy Gheber’s here ?”
She does not dream-—all sense, all ear,
She drinks the words, “ thy Gheber’s here.’’
Twas his own voice—she could not err-r-
Throughout the breathing world's extent
There was but one such voice for her,
So kind, so soft, so eloquent!
Oh! sooner shall the rose of May
Mistake her own sweet nightingale,
And to some meaner minstrel’s lay
Open her bosom’s glowing veil,4
Than Love shall ever doubt a tone,
A breath of the beloved one I
4	A frequent image among the oriental poets. “ The nightingales
warbled their enchanting notes, and rent the thin veils of the rose-bud
and the rose.”—Jami.
Though blest, 'mid all her ills, to think
She has that one beloved near,
Whose smile, though met on ruin’s brink,
Has power to make ev’n ruin dear,—
Yet soon this gleam of rapture, crost
By fears for him, is chill’d and lost.
How shall the ruthless Η a fed brook
That one of Gheber blood should look,
With aught but curses in his eye,
On her—a maid of Araby—
A Moslem maid—the child of him,
Whose bloody banner’s dire success
Has left their altars cold and dim,
And their fair land a wilderness!
And, worse than all, that night of blood
Which comes so fast—oh! who shall stay
The sword, that once has tasted food
Of Persian hearts, or turn its way ?
What arm shall then the victim cover,
Or from her father shield her lover ?
“ Save him, my God!” she inly cries—
“ Save him this night—and if thine eyes
“ Have ever welcom’d with delight
“ The sinner’s tears, the sacrifice
“ Of sinners’ hearts—guard him this night,
u And here, before thy throne, I swear
“ From my heart’s inmost core to tear
“ Love, hope, remembrance, though they be
“ Link’d with each quivering life-string there,
“ And give it bleeding all to Thee!
“ Let him but live, the burning tear,
“ The sighs, so sinful yet so dear,
“ Which have been all too much his own,
“ Shall from this hour be Heaven’s alone.
“ Youth pass’d in penitence, and age
“ In long and painful pilgrimage,
“ Shall leave no traces of the flame
“ That wastes me now—nor shall his name
“ E’er bless my lips, but when I pray
“ For his dear spirit, that away
“ Casting from its angelic ray
“ Th’ eclipse of earth, he too may shine
“ Redeem’d, all glorious and all Thine!
“ Think-»think what victory to win
“ One radiant soul like his from sin;—
“ One wandering star of virtue back
“ To its own native, heaven-ward track!
“ Let him but live, and both are Thine,
“ Together Thine—for, blest or crost,
“ Living or dead, his doom is mine,
“ And if he perish, both are lost!”
The next evening Lalla Rookh was entreated by
her Ladies to continue the relation of her wonderful
dream; but the fearful interest that hung round the
fate of Hind a and her lover had completely removed
every trace of it from her mind;—much to the dis-
appointment of a fair seer or two in her train, who
prided themselves on their skill in interpreting visions,
and who had already remarked, as an unlucky omen,
that the Princess, on the very morning after the dream,
had worn a silk dyed with the blossoms of the sorrowful
tree, Nilica.
Fadladeen, whose wrath had more than once
broken out during the recital of some parts of this
most heterodox poem, seemed at length to have made
up his mind to the infliction; and took his seat this
evening with all the patience of a martyr, while the
Poet continued his profane and seditious story thus
To tearless eyes and hearts at ease
The leafy shores and sun-bright seas,
That lay beneath that mountain's height,
Had been a fair, enchanting sight.
Twas one of those ambrosial eves
A day of storm so often leaves
At its calm setting—when the West
Opens her golden bowers of rest,
And a moist radiance from the skies
Shoots trembling down, as from the eyes
Of some meek penitent, whose last,
Bright hours atone for dark ones past,
And whose sweet tears, o'er wrong forgiven,
Shine, as they fall, with light from heaven!
Twas stillness all—the winds that late
Had rush'd through Kerman's almond groves,
And shaken from her bowers of date
That cooling feast the traveller loves,1
1 “ In parts of Kerman, whatever dates are shaken from the trees by
the wind they do not touch, but leave them for those who have not any, or
for travellers.”—JEi« Haukel.
\
Now, lull’d to languor, scarcely curl
The Green-Sea wave, whose waters gleam
Limpid, as if her mines of pearl
Were melted all to form the stream.
And her fair islets, small and bright,
With their green shores reflected there,
Look like those Peri isles of light,
That hang by spell-work in the air.
But vainly did those glories burst
On Hinda’s dazzled eyes, when first
The bandage from her brow was taken,
And pale and aw’d as those who waken
In their dark tombs—when,, scowling near,
The Searchers of the Grave * appear,—
She shuddering turn’d to read her fate
In the fierce eyes that flash’d around;
And saw those towers all desolate,
That o’er her head terrific frown’d,
As if defying ev’n the smile
Of that soft heaven to gild their pile.
*	The two terrible angele, Monkir and Nakir; who are called “ the
Searchers of the Grave” in the “ Creed of the orthodox Mahometans'* given
by Ockley, vol. 2.
In vain, with mingled hope and fear,
She looks for him whose voice so dear
Had come, like music, to her ear—
Strange, mocking dream! again ’tis fled.
And oh! the shoots, the pangs of dread
That through her inmost bosom run,
When voices from without proclaim
“ Hafed, the Chief”—and, one by one,
The warriors shout that fearful name!
He comes—the rock resounds his tread—
How shall she dare to lift her head,
Or meet those eyes, whose scorching glare
Not Yemen’s boldest sons can bear?
In whose red beam, the Moslem tells,
Such rank and deadly lustre dwells,
As in those hellish fires that light
The mandrake’s charnel leaves at night!3
How shall she bear that voice’s tone,
At whose loud battle-cry alone
Whole squadrons oft in panic ran,
Scatter'd, like some vast caravan,
5	“ The Arabians call the mandrake 6 the Devil’s candle," on account
of its shining appearance in the night/**—Richardson.
When, stretch’d at evening round the well,
They hear the thirsting tiger’s yell!
Breathless she stands, with eyes cast down,
Shrinking beneath the fiery frown,
Which, fancy tells her, from that brow
Is Hashing o’er her fiercely now;
And shuddering, as she hears the tread
Of his retiring warrior band.—
Never was pause so full of dread;
Till Ha fed with a trembling hand
Took hers, and, leaning o’er her, said,
“ Hinda !"—that word was all he spoke,
And ’twas enough—the shriek that broke
From her full bosom told the rest—
Breathless with terror, joy, surprise,
The maid but lifts her wondering eyes,
To hide them on her Gheber’s breast!
’Tis he, ’tis he—the man of blood,
The fellest of the Fire-fiend’s brood,
Ha fed, the demon of the fight,
Whose voice unnerves, whose glances blight,—
Is her own loved Gheber, mild
And glorious as when first he smil’d ..............
In her lone tower, and left such beams
Of his pure eye to light her dreams,
That she believed her bower had given
Rest to some habitant of heaven!
Moments there are, and this was one,
Snatch’d like a minute’s gleam of sun
Amid the black Simoom’s eclipse—
Or like those verdant spots that bloom
Around the crater’s burning lips,
Sweetening the very edge of doom!
The past—the future—all that Fate
Can bring of dark or desperate
Around such hours, but makes them cast
Intenser radiance while they last!
Ev’n he, this youth—though dimm’d and gone
Each star of Hope that cheer’d him on—
His glories lost—his cause betray’d—
Iran, his dear-lov’d country, made
A land of carcases and slaves,
One dreary waste of chains and graves!—
Himself but lingering, dead at heart,
To see the last, long-struggling breath
Of Liberty’s grea.t soul depart,
Then lay him down, and share her death—
Ev’n he, so sunk in wretchedness,
With doom still darker gathering o’er him,
Yet, in this moment’s pure caress,
In the mild eyes that shone before him,
Beaming that blest assurance, worth
All other transports known on earth,
That he was lov’d—well, warmly lov’d—
Oh! in this precious hour he prov’d
How deep, how thorough-felt the glow
Of rapture, kindling out of woe
How exquisite one single drop
Of bliss, thus sparkling to the top
Of misery’s cup—how keenly quaiPd,
Though death must follow on the draught!
She too, while gazing on those eyes
That sink into her soul so deep,
Forgets all fears, all miseries,
Or feels them like the wretch in sleep,
Whom fancy cheats into a smile,
Who dreams of joy, and sobs the while!
The mighty Ruins where they stood,
Upon the mount’s high, rocky verge,
Lay open tow’rds the ocean flood,
Where lightly o’er th’ illumin’d surge
Many a fair bark that, all the day,
Had lurk’d in sheltering creek or bay,
Now bounded on and gave their sails,
Yet dripping, to the evening gales;
Like eagles, when the storm is done,
Spreading their wet wings in the sun.
The beauteous clouds, though daylight’s Star
Had sunk behind the hills of Lar,
Were still with lingering glories bright,—
As if, to grace the gorgeous West,
The Spirit of departing Light
That eve had left his sunny vest
Behind him, ere he wing’d his flight.
Never was scene so form’d for love!
Beneath them, waves of crystal move
In silent swell—heav’n glows above,
And their pure hearts, to transport given,
Swell like the wave, and glow like heaven !
But ah! too soon that dream is past—
Again, again her fear returns;—
Night, dreadful night, is gathering fast,
More faintly the horizon burns,
And every rosy tint that lay
On the smooth sea has died away.
Hastily to the darkening skies
A glance she casts—then wildly cries
“ At night, he said—and, look, "tis near—
“ Fly, fly—if yet thou lov’st me, .fly—
“ Soon will his murderous band be here,
“ And I shall see thee bleed and die_____
“ Hush!—heard’st thou not the tramp of men
“ Sounding from yonder fearful glen ?—
“ Perhaps ev’n now they climb the wood—
“ Fly, fly—though still the West is bright,
“ He’ll come—oh! yes—he wants thy blood—
“ I know him—he’ll not wait for night!”
In terrors ev’n to agony
She clings around the wondering Chief
“ Alas, poor wilder’d maid! to me
“ Thou ow’st this raving trance of grief.
Lost as I am, nought ever grew
Beneath my shade but perish’d too—
My doom is like the Dead Sea air,
And nothing lives that enters there!
Why were our barks together driven
Beneath this morning’s furious heaven ?
Why, when I saw the prize that chance
** Had thrown into my desperate arms,—
When, casting but a single glance
“ Upon thy pale and prostrate charms,
I vow’d (though watching viewless o’er
“ Thy safety through that hour’s alarms)
To meet the* unmanning sight no more—
Why have I broke that heart-wrung vow?
Why weakly, madly met thee now ?—
Start not—that noise is but the shock
** Of torrents through yon valley hurrd—.
Dread nothing here—upon this rock
“ We stand above the jarring world,
Alike beyond its hope—its dread—
In gloomy safety, like the Dead!
Or, could ev’n earth and hell unite
In league to storm this Sacred Height,
Fear nothing thou—myself, to-night,
“ And each overlooking star that dwells
“ Near God will be thy centinels;—
“ And, ere to-morrow's dawn shall glow,
“ Back to thy sire—"
“ To-morrow!—no—”
The maiden scream'd—“ thou'lt never see
“ To-morrow’s sun—death, death will be
“ The night-cry,through each reeking tower,
“ Unless we fly, ay, fly this hour!
“ Thou art betray'd-rsome wretch who knew
“ That dreadful glen's mysterious clew—
“ Nay, doubt not—by yon stars, 'tis true—
“ Has sold thee to my vengeful sire;
“ This morning, with that smile so dire
“ He wears in joy, he told me all,
“ And stamp'd in triumph through our hall,
“ As though thy heart already beat
“ Its last life-throb beneath his feet!
“ Good Heav'n, how little dreamed I then
“ His victim was my own lov'd youth!—
“ Fly—send—let some one watch the glen—
“ By all my hopes of heaven 'tis truth!"
Oh! colder than the wind that freezes
Founts, that but now in sunshine play'd,
Is that congealing pang which seizes
The trusting bosom, when betray'd.
He felt it—deeply felt—and stood,
As if the tale had froz'n his blood,
So maz'd and motionless was he;—
Like one whom sudden spells enchant,
Or some mute, marble habitant
Of the still Halls of Ishmonie !4
But soon the painful chill was o'er,
And his great soul, herself once more,
Look'd from his brow in all the rays
Of her best, happiest, grandest days!
Never, in moment most elate,
Did that high spirit loftier rise;—
While bright, serene, determinate,
His looks are lifted to the skies,
4 For an account of Ishmonie, the petrified city in Upper Egypt, where
it is said there are many statues of men, women, &c. to be seen to this
day, v. Perry'» View of the Levant.
As if the.signal-lights of Fate
Were shining in those awful eyes!
Tis come—his hour of martyrdom
In Iran's sacred cause is come;
And, though his life has pass'd away
Like lightning on a stormy day,
Yet shall his death-hour leave a track
Of glory, permanent and bright,
To which the brave of after-times,
The suffering brave, shall long look back
With proud regret,—and by its light
Watch through the hours of slavery's night
For vengeance on the' oppressor's crimes!
This rock, his monument aloft,
Shall speak the tale to many an age;
And hither bards and heroes oft
Shall come in secret pilgrimage,
And bring their warrior sons, and tell
The wondering boys where Hafed fell,
And swear them on those lone remains
Of their lost country's ancient fanes,
Never—while breath of life shall live
Within them—never to forgive
The* accursed race, whose ruthless chain
Has left on Iran's neck a stain
Blood, blood alone can cleanse again!
Such are the swelling thoughts that now
Enthrone themselves on Ha fed’s brow;
And ne'er did Saint of Issa 5 gaze
On the red wreath, for martyrs twin'd,
More proudly than the youth surveys
That pile, which through thg gloom behind,
Half lighted by the altar’s fire,
Glimmers,—his destin’d funeral pyre!
Heap'd by his own, his comrades' hands,
Of every wood of odorous breath,
There, by the Fire-God’s shrine it stands,
Ready to fold in radiant death
The few still left of those who swore
To perish there, when hope was o'er—
The few, to whom that couch of flame,
Which rescues them from bonds and shame,
Is sweet and welcome as the bed
For their own infant Prophet spread,
*	Jesus.
When pitying Heav’n to roses turn'd
The death-flames that beneath him burn’d!6
With watchfulness the maid attends
His rapid glance, where'er it bends—
Why shoot his eyes such awful beams ?
What plans he now ? what thinks or dreams ?
Alas! why stands he musing here,
When every moment teems with fear?
** Hafed, my own beloved Lord,"
She kneeling cries—“ first, last ador’d!
“ If in that soul thou’st ever felt
“ Half what thy lips impassion’d swore,
“ Here, on my knees that never knelt
“ To any but their God before,
“ I pray thee, as thou lov’st me, fly-—
“ Now, now—ere yet their blades are nigh.
“ Oh haste—the bark that bore me hither
“ Can waft us o’er yon darkening sea
“ East—west—alas, I care not whither,
“ So thpu art safe, and I with thee!
•	The Ghebers say that when Abraham, their great Prophet, was
thrown into the fire by order of Nimrod, the flame turned instantly into
“ a bed of roses, where the child sweetly reposed*—Tavemier*
“ Go where we will, this hand in thine,
“ Those eyes before me smiling thus,
* Through good and ill, through storm and shine,
“ The world’s a world of love for us!
“ On some calm, blessed shore we’Jl dwell,
Where ’tis no crime to love too well;—
“ Where thus to worship tenderly
“ An erring child of light like thee
“ Will not be sin—or, if it be,
“ Where we may weep our faults away,
“ Together kneeling, night and day,
“ Thou, for my sake, at Alla’s shrine,
“ And I—at any God’s,. for thine!”
Wildly these passionate words she spoke—
Then hung her head, and wept for shame;
Sobbing, as if a heart-string broke
With every deep-heav’d sob that came.
While he, young, warm—oh! wonder not
If, for a moment, pride and fame,
His oath—his cause—that shrine of flame,
And Iran’s self are all forgot
For her whom at his feet he sees,
Kneeling in speechless agonies.
No, blame him not, if Hope awhile
Dawn'd in his soul, and threw her smile
O’er hours to come—o’er days and nights,
Wing’d with those precious, pure delights
Which she, who bends all beauteous there,
Was born to kindle and to share!
A tear or two, which, as he bow'd
To raise the suppliant, trembling stole,
First warn’d him of this dangerous cloud
Of softness passing o’er his soul.
Starting, he brush’d the drops away,
Unworthy o’er that cheek to stray;—
Like one who, on the morn of fight,
Shakes from his sword the dew of night,
That had but dimm'd, not stain’d its light.
Yet, though subdued th’ unnerving thrill,
Its warmth, its weakness linger’d still
So touching in each look and tone,
That the fond, fearing, hoping maid
Half counted on the flight she pray’d,
Half thought the hero’s soul was grown
As soft, as yielding as her own,
And smil’d and bless'd him, while he said,*—
“ Yes—if there be .some happier sphere,
“ Where fadeless truth like ours is dear
“ If there be any land of rest
M For those who love and ne'er forget,
“ Oh! comfort thee—for safe and blest
“ We'll meet in that calm region yet!”
Scarce had she time to ask her heart
If good or ill these words impart,
When the rous’d youth impatient flew
To the tower-wall, where, high in view,
A ponderous sea-horn7 hung, and blew
A signal, deep and dread as those
The storm-fiend at his rising blows.-**
Full well his Chieftains, sworn and true
Through life and death, that signal knew;
For 'twas th' appointed warning-blast,
Th' alarm, to tell when hope was past,
And the tremendous death-die cast!
7 “ The shell called Siiankoe, common to India, Africa, and the Medi-
terranean, and still used in many parts as a trumpet for bloving alarms or
giving signals: it sends forth a deep and hollow sound.”—Pennant,
And there, upon the mouldering tower,
Has hung this sea-horn many an hour,
Ready to sound o'er land and sea
That dirge-note of the brave and free.
They came—his Chieftains at the call
Came slowly round, and with them all—
Alas, how few!—the worn remains
Of those who late o'er Kerman's plains
Went gaily prancing to the clash
Of Moorish zel and tymbalon,
Catching new hope from every flash
Of their long lances in the sun—
And, as their coursers charg'd the wind,
And the white οχ-tails stream'd behind, *
Looking, as if the steeds they rode
Were wing'd, and every Chief a God !
How fall'n, how alter’d now! how wan
Each scarr'd and faded visage shone,
As round the burning shrine they came;—
How deadly was the glare it cast,
*	“ The finest ornament for the horses is made of six large flying tassels
of long white hair, taken out of the tails of wild oxen, that are to be found
in some places of the Indies.”— Thevenot.
As mute they paus’d before the flame
To light their torches as they pass’d!
Twas silence all—the youth had plann’d
The duties of his soldier-band;
And each determin’d brow declares
His faithful Chieftains well know theirs.
But minutes speed—night gems the skies—
And oh how soon, ye blessed eyes,
That look from heav’n, ye may behold
Sights that will turn your star-fires cold!
Breathless with awe, impatience, hope,
The maiden sees the veteran group
Her litter silently prepare,
And lay it at her trembling feet;—
And now the youth, with gentle care,
Has plac’d her in the shelter’d seat,
And press’d her hand—that lingering press
Of hands, that for the last time sever;
Of hearts, whose pulse of happiness,
When that hold breaks, is dead for ever.
And yet to her this sad caress
Gives hope—so fondly hope can err!
Twas joy, she thought, joy’s mute excess—
Their happy flight's dear harbinger;
Twas warmth—assurance—tenderness—
Twas any thing but leaving her·.
“ Haste, haste!" she cried, “ the clouds grow dark,
“ But still, ere night, we'll reach the bark;
“ And, by to-morrow's dawn—oh bliss ?
“ With thee upon the sunbright deep,
“ Far off, I'll but remember this,
“ As some dark vanish'd dream of sleep!
“ And thou—" but ha!—he answers not>—
Good Heav'n!—and does she go alone ?
She now has reach'd that dismal spot,
Where, some hours since, his voice’s tone
Had come to soothe her fears and ills,
Sweet as the Angel Israfil's, 0
When every leaf on Eden's tree
Is trembling to his minstrelsy—
Yet now—oh now, he is not nigh*—
“ Hafed! my Hafed!—if it be
*	“ The Angel Iarafil, who has the most melodious voice of all Gud'i
creaturee.”—Sale.
“ Thy will, thy doom this night to die,
“ Let me but stay to die with thee,
“ And I will bless thy loved name,
“ Till the last life-breath leave this frame.
“ Oh! let our lips, our cheeks be laid
“ But near each other while they fade;
“ Let us but mix our parting breaths,
“ And I can die ten thousand deaths!
“ You too, who hurry me away
“ So cruelly, one moment stay—
“ Oh ! stay·—one moment is not much—
“ He yet may come—for him I pray—
“ Hafed ! dear Hafed !—” all the way
In wild lamentings, that would touch
A heart of stone, she shriek’d his name
To the dark woods—no Hafed came:—
No—hapless pair! you’ve looked your last;
Your hearts should both have broken then
The dream is o’er—your doom is cast—
You’ll never meet on earth again !
Alas for him, who hears her cries!—
Still half-way down the steep he stands,
Watching with fix’d and feverish eyes
The glimmer of those burning brands,
That down the rocks, with mournful ray,
Light all he loves on earth away!
Hopeless as they who, far at sea,
By the cold moon have just consign’d
The corse of one, lov’d tenderly,
To the bleak flood they leave behind;
And on the deck still lingering stay,
And long look back, with sad delay,
To watch the moonlight on the wave,
That ripples o’er that cheerless grave.
But see—he starts—what heard he then ?
That dreadful shout!—across the glen
From the land side it comes, and loud
Rings through the chasm; as if the crowd
Of fearful things, that haunt that dell,
Its Gholes and Dives and shapes of hell
Had all in one dread howl broke out,
So loud, so terrible that shout!
“ They come—the Moslems come!”—he cries,
His proud soul mounting to his eyes,—
“ Now, Spirits of the Brave, who roam
“ Enfranchis’d through yon starry dome,
“ Rejoice—for souls of kindred fire
“ Are on the wing to join your choir!”
'He said—and, light as bridegrooms bound
To their young loves, reclimb’d the steep
And gain’d the shrine—his Chiefs stood round—
Their swords, as with instinctive leap,
Together, at that cry accurst,
Had from their sheaths, like sunbeams, burst.
And hark!—again—again it rings;
Near and more near its echoings
Peal through the chasm—oh! who that then
Had seen those listening warrior-men,
With their swords grasp’d, their eyes of flame
Turn’d on their Chief—could doubt the shame,
Th’ indignant shame with which they thrill
To hear those shouts and yet stand still ?
He read their thoughts—they were his own—
“ What! while our arms can wield these blades,
“ Shall we die tamely ? die alone ?
“ Without one victim to our shades,
“ One Moslem heart where, buried deep,
“ The sabre from its toil may sleep ?
“ No—God of Iran's burning skies!
“ Thou scorn'st th' inglorious sacrifice.
“ No—though of all earth's hope bereft,
“ Life, swords and vengeance still are left.
“ We’ll make yon valley's reeking caves
“ Live in the awe-struck minds of men,
“ 'Till tyrants shudder, when their slaves
“ Tell of the Ghebers' bloody glen.
“ Follow, brave hearts!—this pile remains
“Our refuge· still from life and chains;
“ But his the best, the holiest bed,
“ Who sinks entomb'd in Moslem dead !''
Down the precipitous rocks they sprung,
While vigour, more than human, strung
Each arm and heart.—Th' exulting foe
Still through the dark defiles below,
Track'd by his torches' lurid fire,
Wound slow, as through Golconda's vale1
1 V. Hoole upon the Story of Sinbad.
The mighty serpent, in his ire,
Glides on with glittering, deadly trail.
No torch the Ghebers need—so well
They know each mystery of the dell,
So oft have, in their wanderings,
Cross’d the wild race that round them dwell,
The very tigers from their delves
Look out, and let them pass, as things
Untam’d and fearless like themselves!
There was a deep ravine, that lay
Yet darkling in the Moslem’s way;—
Fit spot to make invaders rue
The many fall’n before the few.
The torrents from that morning’s sky
Had fill’d the narrow chasm breast-high,
And, on each side, aloft and wild,
Huge cliffs and toppling crags were pil’d,
The guards, with which young Freedom lines
The pathways to her mountain shrines.
Here, at this pass, the scanty band
Of Iran’s last avengers stand;—
Here wait, in silence like the dead,
And listen for the Moslem's tread
So anxiously, the carrion7bird
Above them flaps his wing unheard!
They come—that plunge into the water
Gives signal for the work of slaughter.
Now, Ghebers, now—if e'er your blades
Had point or prowess, prove them now—
Woe to the file that foremost wades!
They come—a falchkm greets each brow,
And, as they tumble, trunk on trunk,
Beneath the gory waters sunk,
Still o'er their drowning bodies press
New victims quick and numberless;
Till scarce an arm in Ha fed’s band,
So fierce their toil, has power to stir,
But listless from each crimson hand
The sword hangs, clogg'd with massacre.
Never was horde of tyrants met
With bloodier welcome—never yet
To patriot vengeance hath the sword
More terrible libations pour'd!
All up the dreary, long ravine,
By the red, murky glimmer seen
Of half-quench’d brands, that o’er the flood .
Lie scatter’d round and burn in blood,
What ruin glares! what carnage swims!
Heads, blazing turbans, quivering limbs,
Lost swords that, dropp’d from many a hand,
In that thick pool of slaughter stand;—
\
Wretches who wading, half on fire
From the toss’d. brands that round them fly,
Twixt flood and flame m shrieks expire;—
And some who, grasp’d by those that die,
Sink woundless with them, smother’d o’er
In their dead brethren’s gushing gore!
But vainly hundreds, thousands bleed,
Still hundreds, thousands more succeed;—
Countless as tow’rds some flame at night
The North’s-dark insects wing their flight,
And quench or perish in its light.
To this terrific spot they pour—
Till, bridg’d with Moslem bodies o’er,
It bears aloft their slippery tread,
And o’er the dying and the dead,
Tremendous causeway! on they pass.-—
Then, hapless Ghebers, then, alas 1
What hope was left for you ? for you,
Whose yet warm pile of sacrifice
Is smoking in their vengeful eyes—
Whose swords how keen, how fierce they knew,
And bum with shame to find how few.
Crush'd down by that vast multitude,
Some found their graves where first they stood;
While some with hardier struggle died,
And still fought on by Ha fed's side,
Who, fronting to the foe, trod back
Towards the high towers his gory track ;
And, as a lion, swept away
By sudden swell of Jordan's pride
From the wild covert where he lay,®
Long battles with th' overwhelming tide,
*	“ In this thicket upon the banks of the Jordan several aorta of wild
beasts are wont to harbour themselves, whose being washed out of the
covert by the overflowings of the river gave occasion to that allusion of
Jeremiah, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling· of Jordan.”—
Mavndre&s Aleppo.
So fought he back with fierce delay,
And kept both foes and fate at bay !
But whither now ? their track is lost,
Their prey escap’d—guide, torches gone—
By torrent-beds and labyrinths crost,
The scatter’d crowd rush blindly on—
“ Curse on those tardy lights that wind,"
They panting cry, “ so far behind—
“ Oh for a bloodhound’s precious scent,
“ To track the way the Gheber went!"
Vain wish—confusedly along
They rush, more desperate as more wrong;
Till, wilder’d by the far-off lights,
Yet glittering up those gloomy heights,
Their footing, maz’d and lost, they miss,
And down the darkling precipice
Are dash’d into the deep abyss;—
Or midway hang, impal’d on rocks,
A banquet, yet alive, for flocks
Of ravening vultures,—while the dell
Re-echoes with each horrible yell.
Those sound*—the last, to vengeance dear,
That e’er shall ring in Hafed’s ear,—
Now reach’d him, as aloft, alone,
Upon the steep way breathless thrown,
He lay beside his reeking blade,
Resign'd, as if life's task were o'er,
Its last blood-offering amply paid,
And Iran's self could claim no more.
One only thought, one lingering beam
Now broke across his dizzy dream
Of pain and weariness—’twas she
His heart's pure planet, shining yet
Above the waste of memory,
When all life's other lights were set.
And never to his mind before
Her image such enchantment wore.
It seem’d as if each thought that stain'd,
Each fear that chill'd their loves was past,
And not one cloiid of earth remain'd
Between him and her glory cast;—
As if to charms, before so bright,
New grace from other worlds was giveny
And his soul saw her by the light
Now breaking o'er itself from heaven!
A voice spoke near him—’twas the tone
Of a lov’d friend, the only one
Of all his warriors, left with life
From that short night’s tremendous strife.—
“ And must we then, my Chief, die here ?—
“ Foes round us, and the Shrine so near !'*
These words have rous’d the last remains
Of life within him—“ what! not yet
“ Beyond the reach Of Moslem chains 1”—
The thought could make ev’n Death forget
His icy bondage—with a bound
He springs, all bleeding, from the ground,
And grasps his comrade’s arm, now grown
Ev'n feebler, heavier than his own,
And up the painful pathway leads,
Death gaining on each step he treads.
Speed them, thou God, who heard’st their vow!
They mount—they bleed—oh save them now—
The crags are red they’ve clamber’d o’er,
The rock-weed’s dripping with their gore—
Thy blade too, Ha fed, false at length,
Now breaks beneath thy tottering strength—
Haste, haste—the voices of the Foe
«
Come near and nearer from below—
One effort more—thank Heav’n! 'tis past.
They've gain’d the topmost steep at last.
And now they touch the temple's walls,
Now Hafed sees the Eire divine—
When, lo!—his weak, worn comrade falls
Dead on the threshold of the Shrine.
“ Alas, brave soul, too quickly fled I
“ And must I leave thee withering here,
“ The sport of every ruffian’s tread,
“ The mark for every coward's spear?
“ No, by yon altar's sacred beams!”
He cries, and, with a strength that seems
Not of this world, uplifts the frame
Of the fall'n Chief, and tow'rds the flame
Bears him along ;^-with death^damp hand
The corpse upon the pyre he lays,
Then lights the consecrated brand,
And fires the pile, whose sudden blaze
Like lightning bursts o'er Oman's Sea.—
“ Now, Freedom's God J I come to Thee,"
The youth exclaims, and with a smile
Of triumph vaulting on the pile,
In that last effort, ere the fires
Have harm’d one glorious limb, expires 1
What shriek was that on Oman’s tide?
It came from yonder drifting bark»
That just has caught upon her side
The death-light—and again is dark.
It is the boat—ah, why delay’d ?—
That bears the wretched Moslem maid;
Confided to the watchful care
Of a small veteran band, with whom
Their generous Chieftain would not share
The secret of his final doom;
But hop’d when Hinda, safe and free.
Was render’d to her father’s eyes,
Their pardon, full and prompt, would be
The ransom of so dear a prize.—
Unconscious, thus, of Hafed’s fate,
And proud to guard their beauteous freight,
Scarce had they clear’d the surfy waves
That foam around those frightful caves,
When the curst war-whoops, known so well,
Came echoing from the distant dell—
Sudden each oar, upheld and still,
Hung dripping o’er the vessel’s side,
And, driving at the current’s will,
They rock’d along the whispering tide,
While every eye, in mute dismay,
Was tow’rd that fatal mountain turn'd,
Where the dim altar's quivering ray
As yet all lone and tranquil burn’d.
Oh! 'tis not, Hinda, in the power
Of Fancy's most terrific touch
To paint thy pangs in that dread how—
Thy silent agony—’twas such
As those who feel could paint too well,
But none e’er felt and liv’d to tell!
Twas not alone the dreary state
Of a lorn spirit, crush’d by fate,
When, though no more remains to dread,
The panic chill will not depart;—
When, though the inmate Hope be dead»
Her ghost still haunts the mouldering heart.
No—pleasures, hopes, affections gone»
The wretch may bear, and yet live on,
Like things, within the cold rock fpvwd
Alive, when all’s congeal’d wound.
But there’s a blank repose in this,
A calm stagnation, that were bliss
To the keen, burning, harrowing pain,
Now felt through all thy breast and brain—
That spasm of terror, mute, intense,
That breathless, agoniz’d suspense,
From whose hot throb, whose deadly aching
The heart has no relief but breaking!
Calm is the wave—heav’n’s brilliant lights
Reflected dance beneath the prow;—
Time was when, on such lovely nights,
She who is there, so desolate now,
Could sit, all cheerful, though alone,
And ask no happier joy than, seeing
That star-light o’er the waters thrown—
No joy but that to make, her blest,
And the fresh, buoyant sense of Being
That bounds in youth’s yet careless breast,—
Itself a star, not borrowing light,
But in its own glad essence bright.
How different now 1—but, hark, again
The yell of havoc rings—brave men!
In vain, with beating hearts, ye stand
On the bark’s edge—in vain each hand
Half draws the falchion from its sheath;
All’s o’er—in rust your blades may lie -
He, at whose word they’ve scatter’d death,
Ev’n now, this night, himself must die!
Well may ye look to yon dini tower,
And ask, and wondering guess what means
The battle-cry at this dead hour—
Ah! she could tell you—τ-she, who leans
Unheeded there, pale, sunk, aghast,
With brow against the dew-cold mast—
Too well she knows—her more than, life,
Her soul’s first idol and its last,
Lies bleeding in that murderous strife.
But see—what moves upon the height ?
Some signal!—"tis a torch’s light.
What bodes its solitary glare?
In gasping silence toward the shrine
All eyes are turn’d—thine, Hinda, thine
Fix their last failing life-beams there.
*Twas but a moment—fierce and high
The death-pile blaz’d into the sky,
And far away o'er rock and flood
Its melancholy radiance sent;
While Ha fed, like a vision, stood
Reveal'd before the burning pyre,
Tall, shadowy, like a Spirit of Fire
Shrin'd in its own grand dement t
“ Tis he!"—the shuddering maid exclaims,1—
But, while she speaks, he's seen no more;
High burst in air the funeral flames,
And Iran's hopes and hers are o'er!
One wild, heart-broken shriek she gave—
Then sprung, as if to reach that blaze,
Where still she fix'd her dying gaze,
And, gazing, sunk, into the wave,—
Deep, deep,—where never care or pain
Shall reach her innocent heart again!
Farewell—farewell to thee, Araby's daughter!
(Thus warbled a Peri beneath the dark sea)
No pearl ever lay, under Oman's green water,
More pure in its shell than thy Spirit in thee.
Oh ! fair as the sea-flower close to thee growing,
How light was thy heart 'till love's witchery came,
Like the wind of the south3 o'er a summer lute blowing,
And hush'd all its music and wither’d its frame!
But long, upon Araby's green sunny highlands,
Shall maids and their lovers remember the doom
Of her, who lies sleeping among the Pearl Islands,
With nought but the sea-star4 to light up her tomb.
And still, when the merry date-season is burping,
And calls to the palm-groves the young and the old,4
The happiest there, from their pastime returning,
At sunset, will weep when thy story is told.
The young village maid, When with flowers she dresses
Her dark flowing hair fbtf some festival day,
*	“ This wind (the Samoor) so softens the strings of lutes, that they can
never be tuned while it lasts.”—Stephen's Persia.
4 “ One of the greatest curiosities found in the Persian Gulf is a fisl}
which the English call Star-fish. It is circular, and at night very luminous,
resembling the full moon surrounded by rays.”—Mirza Abu Taleb.
b “ For a description of the merriment of the date-taMe* of their work,
their dances, and their return home from the palm-groves at the end of
autumn with the fruits, v. Kempfer, Amccnitat. ExoL
Will think of thy fate till, neglecting her tresses,
She mournfully turns from the mirror away.
Nor shall Iran, belov’d of her Hero! forget thee,—
Though tyrants watch over her tears as they start,
Close, close by the side of that Hero she'll set thee,
Embalm'd in the innermost shrine of her heart.
Farewell—be it ours to embellish thy pillow
With every thing beauteous that grows in the deep;
Each flower of the rock and each gem of the billow
Shall sweeten thy bed and illumine thy sleep.
Around thee shall glisten the loveliest amber
That ever the sorrowing sea-bird has wept;e
With many a shell, in whose hollow-wreath'd chamber,)
We, Peris of Ocean, by moonlight have slept.
We'll dive where the gardens of coral lie darkling,
And plant all the rosiest stems at thy head ;
*	Same naturalists have imagined that amber is a concretion of the tears
of birds.-—▼. Trrvoux, Chamber».
We’ll seek where the sands of the Caspian7 are spark*
ling*
And gather their gold to strew over thy bed.
Farewell—farewell—until Pity’s sweet fountain
Is lost in the hearts of the fair and the brave,
They’ll weep for the Chieftain who died on that moun-
tain,
They’ll weep for the Maiden who sleeps in this wave;
7 “ The bay Kieselarke, which is otherwise called the Golden Bay, the
sand whereof shines as fire.”—Struy.
The singular placidity with which Fadladeen had
listened» during the latter part of this obnoxious story,
surprised the Princess and Feramouz exceedingly;
and even inclined towards him the hearts of these
unsuspicious young persons, who little knew the source
of a complacency so marvellous. . The truth was, he
had been organizing, for the last few days, a most
laudable plan of persecution against the Poet, in con-
sequence of some passages that had fallen from him on
the second evening of recital,—which appeared to this
worthy Chamberlain to contain language and prin-
ciples, for which nothing short of the summary cri-
ticism of the Chabuk1 would be advisable. It was
his intention, therefore, immediately on their arrival
at Cashmere, to give information to the King of Bu-
charia of the very dangerous sentiments of his minstrel;
and if, unfortunately, that monarch did not act with
suitable vigour on the occasion, (that is, if he did not
1 “ The application of whips or rods.”—Dubois.
give the Chabuk to Feramorz, and a place to Fad»
ladeen), there would be an end, he feared, of all legi-
timate government in Bucharia. He could not help,
however, auguring better both for himself and the cause
of potentates in general; and it was the pleasure arising
from these mingled anticipations that diffused such
unusual satisfaction through his features,' and made his
eyes shine out, like poppies of the desert, over the wide
and lifeless wilderness of that countenance.
Having decided upon the Poet's chastisement in this
manner, he thought it but humanity to spare him
the minor tortures of criticism. Accordingly, when
they assembled next evening in the pavilion, and
Lalla Rookh expected to see all the beauties of her
bard melt away, one by one, in the acidity of criticism,
like pearls in the cup of the Egyptian Queen,—he
agreeably disappointed her by merely saying, with an
ironical smile, that the merits of such a poem deserved
to be tried at a much higher tribunal; and then sud-
denly passing off into a panegyric upon all Mussul-
man sovereigns, more particularly his august and Im-
perial master, Aurungzebe,—the wisest and best of
the descendants of Timur,—who, among other great
things he had done for mankind, had given to him,
Fadladeen, the very profitable posts of Betel-carrier
and Taster of Sherbets to the Emperor, Chief Holder
of the Girdle of beautiful Forms®, and Grand Nazir,
or Chamberlain of the Haram.
They were now not far from that Forbidden River*3
beyond which no pure Hindoo can pass; and were
reposing for a time in the rich valley of Hussun Ab-
daul, which had always been a favourite resting-
place of the Emperors in their annual migrations to
Cashmere. Here often had the Light of the Faith,
Jehanguire, wandered with his beloved and beautiful
Nounnahal; and here would Lalla Rookh have been
•	Kempfer mentions such an officer among the attendants of the King
of Persia, and calls him “ form» corporis estimator.” His business was,
at stated periods, to measure the ladies of the Haram by a sort of regula·
tion-girdle, whose limits it was not thought graceful to exceed. If any of
them outgrew this standard of shape, they were reduced by abstinence
till they came within its bounds.
*	The Attock.
happy to remain for ever, giving up the throne of Bu-
qharia and the world, for Feramobz and love in this
sweet lonely valley. The time was now fast approach-
ing when she must see him no longer,—or see him with
eyes whose every look belonged to another; and there
was a melancholy preciousness in these last moments,
which made her heart cling to them as it would to life.
During the latter part of the journey, indeed, she htul
sunk into a deep sadness, from which nothing but
the presence of the young minstrel could awake her·
like those lamps in tombs, which only light up when
the air is admitted, it was only at his approach that
her eyes became smiling and animated. But. here»
in this dear valley, every moment was an age of plea*
sure; she saw him all day and was, therefore, all day
happy,—resembling, she often thought, that people of
Zinge, who attribute the unfading cheerfulness they
enjoy to one genial star that rises nightly over their
heads4.
The whole party, indeed, seemed in their liveliest
4	The star Soheil, or Canopus.
mood during the few days they passed in this delight-
ful solitude. The young attendants of the Princess,
who were here allowed a freer range than they could
safely be indulged with in a less sequestered place, ran
wild among the gardens and bounded through the mea-
dows, lightly as young roes over the aromatic plains of
Tibet. While Fadladeen, beside the spiritual com-
fort he derived from a pilgrimage to the tomb of. the
Saint from whom the valley is named, had opportu-
nities of gratifying, in a small way, his taste for vic-
timfc* by putting to death some hundreds of those un-
fortunate little lizards, which all pious Mussulmans
make it a point to kill;—taking for granted, that the
manner in which the creature hangs its head is meant
as a mimicry of the attitude in which the Faithful say
their prayers!
About two miles from Hussun Abdaul were those
Royal Gardens, which had grown beautiful under the
care of so many lovely eyes, and were beautiful still,
though those eyes could see them no. longer. This
place, with its flowers and its holy silence, interrupted
only by the dipping of the wings of birds in its marble
basons filled with the pure water of those hills, was tq
Lalla Rookh all that her heart could fancy of fra-
grance, coolness, and almost heavenly tranquillity. As
the Prophet said of Damascus, “ it was too delicious j”
—and here, inlisteningto the sweet voice of Feramorz,
or reading in his eyes what yet he never dared to tell
her, the most exquisite moments of her whole life were
passed. One evening, when they had been talking
of the Sultana Nourmahal,—the Light of the Haram5,
who had so often wandered among these flowers, and
fed with her own hands, in those marble basons, the
small shining fishes of which she was so fond,6—the
youth, in order to delay the moment of separation,
proposed to recite a short story, or rather rhapsody,
of which this adored Sultana was the heroine. It
related, he said, to the reconcilement of a sort of
lovers' quarrel, which took place between her and
the Emperor during a Feast of Roses at Cashmere;
and would remind the Princess of that difference be-
*	Nourmahal signifies Light of the Haram. She was afterwards called
Nomjehan, or the Light of the World.
•	V. note, p. 227.
tween Haroun-al-Raschid and his fair mistress Marida,
which was so happily made up by the sweet strains
of the musician, Moussali. As the story was chiefly
to he told in song, and Feramorz had unluckily for-
gotten his own lute in the valley, he borrowed the
vina of Lalla Rookh's little Persian slave, and thus,
began:—
~Who has not heard of the Vale of Cashmere(
With its roses the brightest that earth ever gave,1
%
Jts temples, and grottos, and fountains as clear
As the love-lighted eyes that hang over their wave ?
Oh! to see it at sunset,—when warm o’er the Lake
Its splendour at parting a summer eve throws,
Like a bride, full of blushes, when ling’ring to take
A last look of her mirror at night ere she goes!—
When the shrines through the foliage are gleaming half
shown,
And each hallows the hour by some rites of its own.
Here the music of pray'r from a minaret swells,
Here the Magian his urn full of perfume is swinging,
And here, at the altar, a zone of sweet bells
Round the waist of some fair Indian dancer is ringing.9
1 “ The rose of Kashmire for its brilliancy and delicacy of odour has
long been proverbial in the East.”—Forster.
•	“ Tied round her waist the zone of bells, that sounded with ravishing
melody.”—Song qf Jayadeva.
Or to 8ee it by moonlight,—when mellowly shines
The light o'er its palaces, gardens and shrines;
When the water-falls gleam like a quick fall of stars,
And the nightingale's hymn from the Isle of Chenars
Is broken by laughs and light echoes of feet
From the cool, shining walks where the young people
meet.—-
Or at morn, when the magic of daylight awakes
A new wonder each minute, as slowly it breaks,
Hills, cupolas, fountains, call’d forth every one
Out of darkness, as they were just born of the Sun.
When the Spirit of Fragrance is up with the day,
From his Haram of night-flowers stealing away;
And the wind, full of wantonness, woos like a lover
The young aspen-trees3 till they tremble all over.
When the East is as warm as the light of first hopes,
And Day, with his banner of radiance unfurl’d,
Shines in through the mountainous portal4 that opes,
Sublime, from that Valley of bliss to the world!
*	“ The little isles in the Lake of Cachemire are set with arbours and
large-leaved aspen-trees, slender and tall.”—Bernier.
4	« The Tuckt Suliman, the name bestowed by the Mahometans oni this
hill, forms one side of a grand portal to the Lake.”—Forster. ■	···■·
But never yet, by night or day,
In dew of spring or summer's ray,
Did the sweet Valley shine so gay
As now it shines—all love and light,
Visions by day and feasts by night!
A happier smile illumes each brow,
With quicker spread each heart uncloses,
And all is ecstasy,—for now
The Valley holds its Feast of Roses.4
That joyous time, when pleasures pour
Profusely round, and. in their shower
Hearts open, like, the Season's Rose,-—
The Flowret of a hundred leaves, *
Expanding while the dew-fall flows,
And every leaf its balm receives!
* - * *
*Twas when the hour of evening came
Upon the Lake, serene and cool,
5	“ The Feast of Roses continues the whole time of their remaining in
bloom.'"—v. Pietro de la Valle.
•	« Gul sad berk, the Rose of a hundred leaves. I believe a particular
species.”—Ouseley.
When Day had hid his sultry flame
Behind the palms of Baiiamoule. 7
When maids began to lift their heads,
Refresh’d, from their embroider’d beds,
Where they had slept the sun away,
And wak’d to moonlight and to play.
All were abroad—the busiest hive
On Bela’s8 hills is less alive
When saffron beds are full in flower,
Than look’d the Valley in that hour.
A thousand restless torches play’d
Through every grove and island shade;
A thousand sparkling lamps were set
On every dome and minaret;
And fields and pathways, far and near,
Were lighted by a blaze so clear,
That you could see, in wandering round,
The smallest rose-leaf on the ground.
7	Bernier.
•	A place mentioned in the Toozek Jehangeery, or Memoirs of Jehan-
guire, where there is an account of the beds of saffron flowers about
Cashmere.
Yet did the maids and matrons leave
Their veils at home, that brilliant eve;
And there were glancing eyes about,
And cheeks, that would not dare shine out
In open day, but thought they might
Look lovely then, because 'twas night!
And all were free, and wandering,
And all exclaim'd to all they met
That never did the summer bring
So gay a Feast of Roses yet;—
The moon had never shed a light
So clear as that wHich bless'd them there
The roses ne'er shone half so bright,
Nor they themselves look'd half so fair.
And what a wilderness of flowers!
It seem'd as though from all the bowers
And "fairest fields of all the year,
The mingled spoil were scatter'd here.
The Lake too like a garden breathes,
With the rich buds that o'er it lie,—
As if a shower of fairy wreaths
Had fall'n upon it from the sky!
And then the sounds of joy,—the beat
Of tabors and of dancing feet;—
The minaret-cryer’s chaunt of glee
Sung from his lighted gallery,9
And answer'd by a’ziraleet
From neighbouring Haram, wild and sweet;—■
The merry laughter, echoing
From gardens, where the silken swing
Wafts some delighted girl above
The top leaves of the orange grove;
Or, from those infant groups at play
Among the tents' that line the way,
Flinging, unaw’d by slave or mother,
Handfuls of roses at each other!—
And the sounds from the Lake,—the low whisp’ring in boats,
As they shoot through the moonlight;—the dippingofoars,
And the wild, airy warbling that every where floats,
Through the groves, round the islands, as if all the shores
9 “ It is the custom among the wojnen to employ the Maazeen to chaunt
from the gallery of the nearest minaret, which on that occasion is illuminated,
and the women assembled at the house respond at intervals with a ziraleet or
joyous chorus.”—Russel.
1 “ At the keeping of the Feast of Roses we beheld an infinite number of
tents pitched, with such a crowd of men, women, boys and girls, with music,
dances,” &c. &c.—Herbert.
Like those of Katiiaf utter'd music, and gave
An answer in song to the kiss of each wave! *
But the gentlest of all are those sounds, full .of feeling,
That soft from the lute of some lover are stealing,—
Some lover, who knows all the heart-touching power
Of a lute and a sigh in this magical hour.
Oh 1 best’of delights as it every where is
To be near the lov'd. One,—what a rapture is his,
Who in moonlight, and music thus sweetly may glide
O’er the Lake of Cashmere, with that One by his side f
If Wotaan can make the worst wilderness dear,
Think, think wh^t a Heav’n she must make of Cashmere J
t .
So felt the magnificent Son of Acbar, *
When from power and pomp and the trophies of war
He flew to that Valley, forgetting them all
With the Light of the Haram, his young Nourmahal.
When free and uncrown'd as the Conqueror rov’d
By the banks of that Lake, with his only belov’d,
1 “ An old commentator of the Chou-King says, the ancients having remarked
that a current of water made some of the stones near its banks send forth a
sound, they detached some of them, and being charmed with the delightful sound
they emitted, constructed King or musical instruments of them.*—Grosier.
5	Jehanguire was the son of the Great Acbar.
He saw, in the wreaths she would playfully snatch
From the hedges, a glory his crown could not match,
And preferr’d in his heart the least ringlet that crn^'d
Down her exquisite neck to the throne of the wopldi
There’s a beauty, for ever unchangingly bright,
Like the long, sunny lapse of a summer day's light,
Shining on, shining on, by no shadow made tender,
Till Love fells asleep in its sameness of splendour.
This was not the beauty—oh! nothing like this,
That to young Nourmahal gave such magic of bliss;
But that loveliness, ever in motion, which plays
Like the light upon autumn's soft shadowy days,
Now here and now there, giving warmth as it flies
From the lips to the cheek, from the cheek to the eyes,
Now melting in mist and now breaking in gleams,
Like the glimpses a saint has of Heav'n in his dreams!
When pensive, it seem'd as if that very grace,
That charm of all others, was born with her face;
And when angry,—for ev'n in the tranquillest climes
Light breezes will ruffle the flowers sometimes—
The short, passing anger but seem'd to awaken
New beauty, like flow'rs that are sweetest when shaken.
If tenderness touch'd her, the dark of her eye
At once took a darker, a heavenlier dye,
From the depth of whose shadow, like holy revealings
From innermost shrines, came the light of her feelings!
Then her mirth—oh! 'twas sportive as ever took wing
From the heart with a burst, like the wild-bird in spring;—
Illum'd by a wit that would fascinate sages,
Yet playful as Peris just loos'd from their cages.4
While her laugh, full of life, without any controul
But the sweet one of gracefulness, rung from her sou);
And where it most sparkled no glance could discover,
In lip, cheek or eyes, for she brighten'd all over,—
Like any fair lake that the breeze is upon,
When it breaks into dimples and laughs in the sun.
Such, such were the peerless enchantments, that gave
Nourmahal the proud Lord of the East for her slave;
And though bright was his Haram,—a living parterre
Of the flow'rs5 of this planet—though treasures were there,
For which So liman's self might have giv n all the store
That the navy from Ophir e’er wing'd to his shore,
4	In the ware of the Dives with the Peris, whenever the former took the
latter prisoners, “ they shut them up in iron cages, and ftung them on the
highest trees. Here they were visited by their companions, who brought them
the choicest odours.”—Richardson.
*	In the Malay language the same word signifies women and flowers.
Yet dim before Aer were the smiles of themall,
And the Light of his Haram was young Nouhmahal!
But where is she now, this night of joy,
When bliss is every heart’s employ ?—
When all around her is so bright,
So like the visions of a trance,
That one might think, who came by chance
Jnto the vale this happy night,
He saw that City of Delight6
In Fairy4and, whose streets and towers
Are made of gems and light and flowers!—
Where is the lov’d Sultana? where,
When mirth brings out the young and fair,
Does she, the fairest, hide her brow,
In melancholy stillness now ?
Alas—how light a cause may move
Dissension between hearts that love!
Hearts that the world in Vain has tried,'
And sorrow but more closely tied;
That stood the storm, when waves were rough,
Yet in a sunny hour fall off,
*	The capital of Shadukiam. V. note, p. 160.
Like ships, that have gone down at sea,
When heav’n was all tranquillity!
A something, light as air—a look,
A word unkind or wrongly taken—
Oh! love, that tempests never shook,
A breath, a touch like this has shaken.
And ruder words will soon rush in
To spread the breach that words begin ;
And eyes forget the gentle ray
They wore in courtship’s smiling day;
And voices lose the tone that shed
A tenderness round all they said;
Till fast declining, one by one,
The sweetnesses of love are gone,
And hearts, so lately mingled, seem
like broken clouds,—or like the stream,
That smiling left the mountain's brow,
As though its waters ne’er could sever,
Yet, ere it reach the plain below,
Breaks into floods, that part for ever!
Oh you, that have the charge of Love,
Keep him in rosy bondage bound,
As in the Fields of Bliss above
He sits, with flowrets fetter'd round ;—7
Loose not a tie that round him clings,
Nor ever let him use his wings;
For ev’n an hour, a minute’s flight
Will rob the plumes of half their light.
Like that celestial bird,—whose nest
Is found beneath far Eastern skies,—
Who$e wings, though radiant when at rest,
Lose all their glory when he flies! *
Some difference, of this dangerous kind,—
By which, though light, the links that bind
The fondest hearts may soon be riven;
Some shadow in love’s summer heaven,
Which, though a fleecy speck at first,
May yet in awful thunder burst;—
Such cloud it is, that now hangs over
The heart of the Imperial Lover,
7	See the representation of the Eastern Cupid, pinioned closely round
with wreaths of flowers, in Picarfs Ceremonies Religieuses.
8	“ Among the birds of Tonquin is a species of goldfinch, which sings
so melodiously that it is called the Celestial Bird. Its wings, when it is
perched, appear variegated with beautiful colours, but when it flies they
lose all their splendour."—Grosier.
And far hath banish’d from his-sight
His Nourmahal, his HaramVlight!
Hence is it, on this happy night,
When Pleasure through the fields and groves
Has let loose all her world of loves,
And every heart has found its own,—
He wanders, joyless and alone,
And weary as that bird of Thrace,
Whose pinion knows no resting-place. *
In vain the loveliest cheeks and eyes
This £den of the earth supplies
Come crowding round—the cheeks are pale,
The eyes are dim—though rich the spot
With every flow'r this earth has got,
What is it to the nightingale,
If there his darling rose is not?1
In vain the Valley’s smiling throng
Worship him, as he moves along;
» “ As these birds on the Bosphorus are never known to rest, they
are called by the French ‘ les ames damn6es.’ "—DaRoway.
1 “ You may place a hundred handfuls of fragrant herbs and flowers
before the nightingale, yet he wishes not, in his constant heart, for more
than the sweet breath of his beloved rose.”—Jami.
He heeds them not—one smile of hers
Is worth a world of worshippers.
They but the Star’s adorers are,
She is the heav'n that lights the Star!
Hence is it too that Nourmahal,
Amid the luxuries of this hour,
Farfrom the joyous festival,
Sits in her own sequester’d bower;
With no one near, to soothe or aid,
But that inspir’d and wond'rous maid,
Namouna, the Enchantress;—one,
O’er whom his race the golden sun
For unremember’d years has run,
Yet never saw her blooming brow
Younger or fairer than ’tis now.
Nay, rather, as the west-wind’s sigh
Freshens the flower it passes by,
Time’s wing but seem'd, in stealing o’er,
To leave her lovelier than before.
Yet on her smiles a sadness hung,
And when, as oft, she spoke or sung
Of other worlds, there came a light
From her dark eyes so strangely bright,
That all believ'd nor man nor earth
Were conscious of Namodna's birth!
All spells and talismans she knew,
From the great Mantra, * which around
The Air's sublimer Spirits drew,
To the gold gems3 of Afric, bound
Upon the wandering Arab's arm,
To keep him from the Siltim’s4 harm.
And she had pledg’d her powerful art,
Pledg'd it with all the zeal and heart
Of one who knew, though high her sphere,
What ’twas to lose a love so dear,
To find some spell that should recall
Her SelimV smile to Nourmahal !
*	“ He is said to have found the great Mantra, spell or talisman,
through which he ruled over the elements and spirits of all denomina-
tions.*— Wtlfbrd.
5	“ The gold jewels of Jinnie, which are called by the Arabs El Herrez,
from the supposed charm they contain.'”—Jackson.
4	“A demon, supposed to haunt woods, &c. in a human shape.”—
Richardson.
*	The name of Jehanguire before his accession to the throne.
'Twas midnight—through the lattice, wreath’d
With woodbine, many a perfume breath’d
From plants that wake when others sleep,
From timid jasmine buds, that keep
Their odour to themselves all day,
But, when the sun-light dies away,
Let the delicious secret out
To every breeze that roams >about;—
When thus Namouna :—“ Tis the hour
“ That scatters spells on herb and flower,
“ And'garlands might be gather’d now,
“ That, twin'd around the sleeper’s brow,
“ Would make him dream of such delights,
“ Such miracles and dazzling sights
“ As Genii of the Sun- behold,
“ At evening, from their tents of gold
“ Upon the’ horizon—where they play
“ Till twilight comes, and, ray by ray,
“ The sunny mansions melt away!
“ Now too, a chaplet might be wreath’d
“ Of buds o'er which the moon has breath’d,
“ Which worn by her, whose love has stray’d,
“ Might bring some Peri from the skies,
“ Some sprite, whose very soul is made
“ Of flowrets’ breaths and lovers’ sighs,
“ And who might tell----------”
“ For me, for me,”
Cried Nourmahal impatiently,—
“ Oh! twine that wreath for me to-night."
Then, rapidly, with foot as light
As the young musk-roe’s, out she flew
To cull each shining leaf that grew
Beneath the moonlight’s hallowing beams
For this enchanted Wreath of Dreams.
Anemones and Seas of Gold,6
And new-blown lilies of the river,
And those sweet flowrets, that unfold
Their buds on Camadeva’s quiver;—7
The tube-rose, with her silvery light,
That in the Gardens of Malay
Is call’d the Mistress of the Night,8
*	“ Hemasagara, or the Sea of Gold, with flowers of the brightest gold
colour.”—Sir W. Jones.
7	“ This tree (the Nagacesara) is one of the most delightful on earth,
and the delicious odour of its blossoms justly gives them a place in the
quiver of Camadeva or the God of Love.”—Id.
8	“ The Malayans style the tube-rose (Polianthes tuberosa) Sandal
Malam, or the Mistress of the Night.”—Pennant.
So like a bride, scented and bright,
She comes out when the sun’s away.—
Amaranths, such as crown the maids
That wander through Zamaea’s shades;—9
And the white moon-flower, as it shows
On Sekendib’s high crags to those
Who near the isle at evening sail,
Scenting her clove-trees in the gale;—
In short, all flowrets and all plants,
From the divine Amrita tree,1
That blesses heaven’s inhabitants
With fruits of immortality,
Down to the basil8 tuft, that waves
Its fragrant blossom over graves,
' The people of the Batta country hi Sumatra (of which Zamara is one
of the ancient names) “ when not engaged in war, lead an idle, inactive
life, passing the day in playing on a kind of flute, crowned with garlands
of flowers, among which the globe-amaranthus, a native of the country,
mostly prevails.”—Marsden.
1 “ The largest and richest sort (of the Jambu or rose-apple) is called
Amrita or immortal, and the mythologists of Tibet apply the same word
to a celestial tree, bearing ambrosial fruit*—Sir W. Janes.
8	Sweet basil, called Rayhan in Persia, and generally found in church-
yards.
And to the humble rosemary,
Whose sweets so thanklessly are shed
To scent the desert3 and the dead,—
All in that garden- bloom, and all
Are gather’d by young Nourmahal,
Who heaps her baskets with the flowers
And leaves, till they can hold no more;
Then to Namouna flies, and showers
Upon her lap the shining store.
With what delight th’ Enchantress views
So many buds, bath’d with the dews
And beams of that bless’d hour!—her glance
Spoke something, past all mortal pleasures,
As, in a kind of holy trance,
She hung above those fragrant treasures,
Bending to drink their balmy airs,
As if she mix’d her soul with theirs.
And 'twas, indeed, the perfume shed
.From flow’rs and scented flame that fed
3	“ In the Great Desert are found many stalks of lavender and rose·
mary.”—Asiai. Res.	.
Her charmed life—for none had e’er
Beheld her taste of mortal fare,
Nor ever in aught earthly dip,
But the morn’s dew, her roseate lip.
Fill’d with the cool, inspiring smell,
Th’ Enchantress now begins her spell,
Thus singing, as she winds and weaves
In mystic form the glittering leaves:—
I know where the winged visions dwell
That around the night-bed play;
I know each herb and flowret’s bell,
Where they hide their wings by day.
Then hasten we, maid,
To twine our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.
The image of love, that nightly flies
To visit the bashful maid,
Steals from the jasmine flower, that sighs
Its soul, like her, in the shade.
The hope, in dreams, of a happier hour
That alights on misery's brow,
Springs out of the silvery ahnond-flower,
That blooms on a leafless bough.4
Then hasten we, maid,
To twine our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.
The visions, that oft to worldly eyes
The glitter of mines unfold,
Inhabit the mountain-herb,5 that dyes
The tooth of the fawn like gold.
The phantom shapes—oh touch not them—
That appal the murderer’s sight,
Lurk in the fleshly mandrake’s stem,
That shrieks, when torn at night!
Then hasten we, maid,
To twine our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.
*	“ The almond-tree, with white flowers, blossoms on the bare branches.”
Hasselquist.
*	An herb on Mount libanus, which is said to communicate a yellow
golden hue to the teeth of the goats and other animals that graze
upon it.
The dream of the injur’d, patient mind,
That smiles at the wrongs of men,
Is found in the bruis'd and wounded rind
Of the cinnamon, sweetest then!
Then hasten we, maid,
To twine,our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.
No sooner was the flowery crown
Plac'd on her head, than sleep came down,
Gently as nights of summer fall,
Upon the lids of Nourmahal ;—
And, suddenly* a tuneful breeze,
As full of small, rich harmonies
As ever wind, that o’er the tents
Of Azab 6 blew, was full of scents,
Steals on her ear and floats and swells,
Like the first air of morning creeping
Into.those wreathy, Red-Sea shells,
Where Love himself, of old, lay sleeping;—7
® The myrrh country.
7	“ This idea, (of deities living in shells) was not unknown to the
Greeks, who represent the young Nerites,- one of the Cupids, as living
in shells on the shores of the Red Sea.”— WUfbrd.
And now a Spirit form’d, ’twould seem,
Of music and of light, so fair,
So brilliantly his features beam,
And such a sound is in the air
Of sweetness, when he waves his wings,
Hovers around her, and thus sings:—
From Chindara’s8 warbling fount I come,
Call'd by that moonlight garland’s spell;
From Chindara’s fount, my fairy home,
Where in music, mom and night, I dwell.
Where lutes in the air are heard about,
And voices are singing the whole day lonj
And every sigh the heart breathes out
Is turn’d, as it leaves the lips, to song!
Hither I come
From my fairy home,
And if there’s a magic in Music’s strain,
I swear by the breath
- Of that moonlight wreath,
Thy Lover shall sigh at thy feet again.
*	“ A fabulous fountain, where instruments are said to be constantly
playing.*—Richardson.
For mine is the lay that lightly floats,
And mine are the murmuring, dying notes,
That fall as soft as snow on the sea,
And melt in the heart as instantly!
And the passionate strain that, deeply going,
Refines the bosom it trembles through,
f As the musk-wind, over the water blowing,
Ruffles the wave, but sweetens it too!
Mine is the charm, whose mystic sway
The Spirits of past Delight obey;—
Let but the tuneful talisman sound,
And they come, like Genii, hovering round.
And mine is the gentle song, that bears
From soul to soul, the wishes of love,
As a bird, that wafts through genial airs
The cinnamon seed from grove to grove.9
Tis I that mingle in one sweet measure
The past, the present, and future of pleasure;
8	“ The Pompadour pigeon is the species, which, by carrying die fruit
of the cinnamon to different places, is a great disseminator of this valuable
tree.”—V. Brown's Illustr. Tab. 19.
When Memory links the tone that is gone
With the blissful tone that’s still in the ear;
And Hope from a heavenly note flies on
To a note more heavenly still that is near!
The warrior’s heart, when touch'd by me,
Can as downy soft and as yielding be
As his own white plume, that high amid death
Through the field has shone—yet moves with a breath.
And, oh how the eyes of Beauty glisten,
When Music has reach'd her inward soul,
Like the silent stars, that wink and listen
While Heav’n's eternal melodies roll!
So, hither I come
From my fairy home,
And if there's a magic in Music’s strain,
I swear by the breath
Of that moonlight wreath,
Thy Lover shall sigh at thy feet again.
’Tis dawn—at least that earlier dawn,
Whose glimpses are again withdrawn,1
1 “ They have two mornings, the Soobhi Kazim, and the Soobhi Sadig,
the false and the real day-breakWaring.
As if the morn had wak'd, and then
Shut close her lids of light again.
And Nourmahal is up, and trying
The wonders of her lute, whose strings—
Oh bliss!—now murmur like the sighing
From that ambrosial Spirit's wings!
And then, her voice—’tis more than human—
Never, till now, had it been given
To lips of any mortal woman
To utter notes so fresh from heaven;
Sweet as the breath of angel sighs,
When angel sighs are most divine.—
M Oh! let it last till night,” she cries,
“ And he is more than ever mine.”
And hourly she renews the lay,
So fearful lest its heavenly sweetness
Should, ere the evening, fade away,—
For things so heavenly have such fleetness!
But, far from fading, it but grows
Richer, diviner as it flows;
Till rapt she dwells on every string,
And pours again each sound along.
Like Echo, lost and languishing
In love with her own wondrous song.
That evening, (trusting that his soul
Might be from haunting love releas'd
By mirth, by music, and the bowl)
Th’ Imperial Selim held a Feast
In his magnificent Shalimar;—
In whose Saloons, when the first star
Of evening o'er the waters trembled,
The Valley's loveliest all assembled;
All the bright creatures that, like dreams,
Glide through its foliage, and drink beams
Of beauty from its founts and streams.9
And all those wandering minstreUmaids,
Who leave—how can they leave ?—the shades
Of that dear Valley, and are found
Singing in gardens of the South3
Those songs, that ne'er so sweetly sound
As from a young Cashmerian's mouth.
*	“ The waters of Cachemir are the more renowned from its being sup-
posed that the Cachemirians are indebted for their beauty to them.*—
Ali Yezdi.
*	“ From him I received the following little Gazzel or Love Song, the
notes of which he committed to paper from the voice of one of those
singing girls of Cashmere, who wander from that delightful valley over ·
the various parts of India.”—Persian Miscellanies,
There too the Haram’s inmates smile;—
Maids from the West, with sun-bright hair,
And from the Garden of the Nile,
Delicate as the roses there;—4
Daughters of Love from Cyprus’ rocks,
With Paphian diamonds in their locks;—s
Light Peri forms, sucli as there are
On the gold meads of Candahar;6
And they, before whose sleepy eyes,
In their own bright Kathaian bowers,
Sparkle such rainbow butterflies,7
That they might fancy the rich flowers,
That round them in the sun lay sighing,
Had been by magic all set flying!
4	u The roses of the Jinan Nile, or Garden of the Nile (attached to
the Emperor of Marocco’s Palace) are unequalled, and matrasses are made
of their leaves for the men of rank to recline upon.”—Jackson.
5	“On the side of a mountain near Paphos there is a cavern which pro-
duces the most beautiful rock crystal. * On account of its brilliancy it has
been called the Paphian diamond.”—Mariti.
e “ There is a part of Candahar, called Peria or Fairy Land ”—Theoenot.
In some of those countries to the north of India vegetable gold is supposed
to be produced.
7 “ These are the butterflies, which are called in the Chinese language
Every thing young, every thing fair
From East and West is blushing there,
Except—except—oIiNourmahal!
Thou loveliest, dearest of them all,
The one, whose smile shone out alone,
Amidst a world the only one!
Whose light, among so many lights,
Was like that star, on starry nights,
The seaman singles from the sky,
To steer his bark for ever'by!
Thou wert not there—so Selim thought,
And every thing seem’d drear without thee;
But ah! thou wert, thou wert—and brought
Thy charm of song all fresh about thee.
Mingling unnotic’d with a band
Of lutanists from many a land,
And veil’d by such a mask as shades
The features of young Arab maids,—*
Flying Leaves. Some of them have such shining colours, and are so
variegated, that they may be called flying flowers; and indeed they are
always produced in the finest flower-gardens.”—Dunn.
•	“ The Arabian women wear black masks with little daepe, prettily
ordered.”—Carreri. Niebuhr mentions their showing but one eye in con-
versation.
A mask that leaves but one eye free»
To do its best in witchery,—
She rov'd, with beating heart, around,
And waited, trembling, for the minute.
When she might try if still the sound
Of her lov'd lute had magic in it.
The board was spread with fruits and wine;
With grapes of gold, like those that shine
On Casbin's hills;9—pomegranates full
Of melting sweetness, and the pears
And sunniest apples1 that Caubcl
In all its thousand gardens * bears.
Plantains, the golden and the green,
Malaya's nectar’d mangusteen ;s
9	<c The golden grapes of Casbin”—Description of Persia.
1 “ The fruits exported from Caubul are apples, pears, pomegranates,
—ElpJiinstone.
e u We sat down under a tree, listened to the birds, and talked with
the son of our Mehmaundar about our country and Caubul, of which he
gave an enchanting account: that city add its 100,000 gardens, &c.”—Id.
3	“ The Mangusteen, the most delicate fruit in the world; the pride
of the Malay Islands.11—Marsden.
Prunes of Bokara, and sweet nuts
From the far groves of Sam arc and,
And Basra dates, and apricots,
Seed of the Sun,* from Iran’s land;—-
With rich conserve of Visna cherries,5
Of orange flowers, and of those berries
That, wild and fresh, the young gazelles
Feed on in Erac’s rocky dells.6
All these in richest vases smile,
In baskets of pure santal-wood,
And urns of porcelain from that isle7
Sunk underneath the Indian flood,
Whence oft the lucky diver brings
Vases to grace the halls of kings,
4	“ A delicious kind of apricot, called by the Persians tokm-ek-ehems,
signifying sun's seed.”—Descript, of Persia.
5	“ Sweetmeats in a crystal cup, consisting of roseJeaves in conserve,
with lemon or Visna cherry, orange flowers, &c.n—Russell.
*	“ Antelopes cropping the fresh berries of Erac.”—The MoaHakai,
Poem of Tarafa.
7 Mauri-ga-Sima, an island near Formosa, supposed to have been sunk
in the sea for the crimes of its inhabitants. The vessels which the fisher-
men and divers bring up from it are sold at an immense price m China
and Japan.—v. Kemjjfer,
Wines too, of every clime and hue,
Around their liquid lustre threw;
Amber Rosolli8,—the bright dew
From vineyards of the Green-Sea gushing;9
And Shiraz wine, that richly ran
As if that jewel, large and rare,
The ruby, for which Kublai-Khan
Offer'd a city’s wealth,1 was blushing
Melted within the goblets there!
And amply Selim quaffs of each,
And seems resolv’d the floods shall reach
His inward heart,—shedding around
A genial deluge, as they run,
That soon shall leave no spot undrown’d,
For Love to rest his wings upon.
•	Persian Tales.
9	The white wine of Kishma.
1 “ The King of Zeilan is said to have the very finest ruby that was
ever seen. Kublai-Khan sent and offered the value of a city for it, but
the King answered he would not give it for the treasure of the world.”—
Marco Polo.
He little knew how blest the boy
Can float upon a goblet’s streams,
Lighting them with his smile of joy;—
As bards have seen him, in their dreams,
Down the blue Ganges laughing glide
Upon a rosy lotus wreath,*
Catching new lustre from the tide
That with his image shone beneath.
But what are cups, without the aid
Of song to speed them as they flow ?
And see—a lovely Georgian maid,
With all the bloom, the freshen'd glow
Of her own country maidens’ looks,
When warm they rise from Teflis’ brooks;3
And with an eye, whose restless ray,
Full, floating, dark—oh he, who knows
His heart is weak, of heav’n should pray
To guard him from such eyes as those!—
•	The Indians feign that Cupid was first seen floating down the Ganges
on the Nymphaea Nelumbo. v. Pennant.
*	Teflis is celebrated for its natural warm baths, v. Ebn Haukel.
With a voluptuous wildness flings
Her snowy hand across the strings
Of a syrinda,4 and thus sings -
Come hither, come hither—by night and by day,
We linger in pleasures that never are gone;
Like the waves of the summer, as one dies away,
Another as sweet and as shining comes on»
And the Love that is o’er, in expiring, gives birth
To a new one as warm, as unequall’d in bliss;
And oh! if there be an Elysium on earth,
It is this, it is this.
Here maidens are sighing, and fragrant their sigh
As the flower of the Amra just op’d by a bee;4
And precious their tears as that rain from the sky,6
Which turn3 into pearls as it falls in the sea*
4	“ The Indian Syrinda or guitar.”—Syme».
*	“ Delightful are the flowers of the Amra trees on the mountain-tops,
while the murmuring bees pursue their voluptuous toil.”—Song of Jaya-
deva.
6	“ The Niean or drops of spring rain, which they believe to produce
pearls if they fall into shells.”—Richardson.
Oh! think what the kiss and the smile must be worth,
When the sigh and the tear are so perfect in bliss;
And own if there be an Elysium on earth,
It is this, it is this.
Here sparkles the nectar that, hallow’d by love,
Could draw down those angels of old from their
sphere,
Who for wine of this earth7 left the fountains above,
And forgot heaven’s stars for the eyes we have here.
And, bless’d with the odour our goblet gives forth,
What Spirit the sweets of his Eden would miss ?
For oh! if there be an Elysium on earth,
It is this, it is this.
The Georgian’s song was scarcely mute,
When the same measure, sound for sound,
Was caught up by another lute,
And so divinely breathed around,
That all stood hush’d and wondering,
And turn’d and look’d into the air,
7	For an account of the share which wine had in the fall of the angels,
v. Mariti.
As if they thought to see the wing
Of Israfil, 8 the Angel, there;—
So pow’rfully on every soul
That new, enchanted measure stole.
While now a voice, sweet as the note
Of the charm’d lute, was heard to float
Along its chords, and so entwine
Its sound with theirs, that none knew whether
The voice or lute was most divine,
So wond’rously they went together:—
There’s a bliss beyond all that the minstrel has told,
When two, that are link’d in one heavenly tie, -
With heart never changing and brow never cold,
Love on through all ills, and love on till they die!
One hour of a passion so sacred is worth
Whole ages of heartless and wandering bliss;
And oh! if there be an Elysium on earth,
It is this, it is this.
1 The angel of Music, v. note, p· 267.
Twas not the air, ’twas not the words,
But that deep magic in the chords
And in the lips, that gave such power
As Music knew not till that hour.
At once a hundred voices said,
“ It is the mask'd Arabian maid!”
While Selim, who had felt the strain
Deepest of any, and had lain
Some minutes rapt, as in a trance,
After the fairy sounds were o'er,
Too inly touch'd for utterance,
Now motion'd with his hand for more:—
Fly to the desert, fly with me,
Our Arab tents are rude for thee;
But oh! the choice what heart can doubt
Of tents with love, or thrones without?
Our rocks are rough, but smiling there
Th' acacia waves her yellow hair,
Lonely and sweet, nor lov’d the less
For flowering in a wilderness.
Our sands are bare, but down their slope
The silvery-footed antelope
As gracefully and gaily springs
As o’er the marble courts of Kings.
Then come—thy Arab maid will be
The lov’d and lone acacia-tree,
The antelope, whose feet shall bless
With their light sound thy loneliness.
Oh! there are looks and tones that dart
An instant sunshine through the heart,—
As if the soul that minute caught
Some treasure it through life had sought;
As if the very lips and eyes
Predestin’d to have all our sighs,
And never be forgot again,
Sparkled and spoke before us then !
So came thy every glance and tone,
When first on me they breath’d and shone;
New, as if brought from other spheres,
Yet welcome as if lov’d for years!
Then fly with me,—if thou hast known
No other flame, nor falsely thrown
*	A gem away, that thou hadst sworn
Should ever in thy heart be worn.
Come, if the love thou hast for me
Is pure and fresh as mine for thee,—
Fresh as the fountain under ground,
When first ’tis by the lapwing found.9
But if for me thou dost forsake
Some other maid, and rudely break
Her worshipp’d image from its base>
To give to me the ruin’d place;—-
Then, fare thee well—I’d rather make
My bower upon some icy lake
When thawing suns hegin to shine,
Than trust to love so false as thine!
•	The Hudhud, or Lapwing, ip supposed to have the power of dis-
covering water under ground.
There was a pathos in this lay,
That, ev’n without enchantment’s art.,
Would instantly have found its way
Deep into Selim’s burning heart;
But breathing, as it did, a tone
To earthly lutes and lips unknown;
With every chord fresh from the touch
Of Music’s Spirit,—’twas too much!
Starting, he dash'd away the cup,—
Which, all the time of this sweet air,
His hand had held, untasted, up,
As if ’twere fix’d by magic there,—
And naming her, so long unnam’d,
So long qnseen, wildly exclaim’d,
“ Oh Nourmahal! oh Nourmahal!
“ Hadst thou but sung this witching strain,
“ I could forget—forgive thee all,
“ And never leave those eyes again."
The mask is off—the charm is wrought—
And Selim to his heart has caught,
In blushes, more than ever bright,
His Nourmahal, his Haram’s Light!
And well do vanish'd frowns enhance
The charm of every brighten’d glance;
And dearer seems each dawning smite
For having lost its light awhilfe;
And, happier now. for all·her sighs,
As on his ^rm her head reposes,
She whispers him, with laughing eyes,
“ Remember, love, the Feast of Roses V*
_Γ adladeen, at the conclusion of this light rhapsody,
took occasion to sum up his opinion of the young Cash-
merian's poetry,—of which, he trusted, they had that
evening heard the last. Having recapitulated the epi-
thets, “ frivolous”—“ inharmonious”—“ nonsensical,”
he proceeded to say that, viewing it in the most fa-
vourable light, it resembled one of those Maldivian
boats, to which the Princess had alluded in the re-
lation of her dream,1—a slight, gilded thing, sent adrift
without rudder or ballast, and with nothing but vapid
sweets and faded flowers on board. The profusion,
indeed, of flowers and birds, which this poet had
ready on all occasions,—not to mention dews, gems,
&c.—was a most oppressive kind of opulence to his
hearers; and had the unlucky effect of giving to his
style all the glitter of the flower-garden without its
method, and all the flutter of the aviary without its
song. In addition to this, he chose his subjects badly,
and was always most inspired by the worst part of
them. The charms of paganism, the merits of re-
1 V. page 223.
bellion,—these were the themes honoured with his par-
ticular enthusiasm ; and, in the poem just recited, one
of his most palatable passages was in praise of that
beverage of the Unfaithful, wine; “ being, perhaps/'
said he, relaxing into a smile, as conscious of his own
character in the Haram on this point, “ one of those
bards, whose fancy owes all its illumination to the
grape, like that painted porcelain, so curious and so’
tore, whose images are only visible when liquor is
poured into it.” Upon the whole it was his opinion;
from the specimens which they had heard, and which,
he begged to say, were the most tiresome part of the
journey, that—whatever other merits this well-dressed
young gentleman might possess—poetry was by no
means his proper avocation; “ and indeed,” concluded
the critic, “ from his fondness for flowers and for birds,
I would venture to suggest that a florist or a bird·
catcher, is a much more suitable calling for him than a
poet”
e ,	\
They, had now begun to ascend those barren moun-
tains, which separate Cashmere from the rest of India;
and, as the heats were intolerable, and the time of
their encampments limited to the few hours neces-
sary for. refreshment and repose, there was an end ,toi
all their delightful evenings, and Lalla Rookh sajK
no more of Feramorz. She now felt that her short
dream of happiness .was. over, and that she had nothing
but the. recollection of its few blissful hours, like the
one draught of sweet water that serves the camel across
the wilderness» to be her heart's refreshment during
the dreary waste of life that was before her. The
blight that had fallen upon her spirits soon found its
way to her cheek, and her Ladies saw with regret-»*
though not without, some suspicion of the cause—rthat
the beauty of their mistress» of which they were almost
&s proud as of their own, was. fast vanishing away at
the very moment of all when she had most need of it:
What must the King of Bucharia feel, when, instead
of the .lively and beautiful Lalla Rookh, whom the
poets of Delhi had described, as more perfect than the
divinest images in the House of Azor, he should re*
ceive a pale and inanimate victim, upon whose cheelf
neither health nor pleasure bloomed, and from whose
eyes Love had fled,—to hide himself in her heart 1
. If any thing could have charmed away themelan-
choly of her spirits, it would have been the fresh airs
and enchanting scenery of that Valley i which the
Persians so justly called the Unequalled. * But neither
the coolness of its atmosphere, so luxurious after toiling
up those bare and burning mountains,—neitheF the
kplendour of the minarets and pagodas, that shone out
from the depth of its woods, nor the grottos, hermitages
and miraculous fountains, which make every spot of
that region holy ground;—neither the countless water*
fells, that rush into the Valley from all those high and
romantic mountains that encircle it, nor the fair city
tm the Lake, whose houses, roofed with flowers, ap-
peared at a distance like one vast and variegated pan·
fcetre;—not all these wonders and glories of the most
lovely country under the sun could steal her heart for
a minute from those sad thoughts, which but darkened
and grew bitterer every step she advanced*	►
The gay pomps and processions that met her upon
her entrance into the Valley, and the magnificence
with which the roads all along were decorated, did hot·
nour to the taste and gallantry of the young King, ft
j
•	Kachmife be Noseer.—Forsttr.
was night when they approached the city, and, for the
last two miles, they had passed under arches, thrown
from hedge to hedge, festooned with only those rarest
roses from which the Attar Gul, more precious than
gold, is distilled, and illuminated in rich and fanciful
forms with lanterns of the triple-coloured tortoise-shell
of Pegu. Sometimes, from a dark wood by the side
of the road, a display of fire-works would break out,
so sudden and so brilliant, that a Bramin might think
he saw that grove, in whose purple shade the God of
•Battles was bom, bursting into a flame at the moment
of his birth.—While, at . other times, a quick and play·
ful irradiation continued to brighten all the fields and
-gardens by which they passed, forming a line of dancing
lights along the horizon; like the meteors of the north
as they are seen by those hunters, who pursue the white
and blue foxes on the confines of the Icy Sea.
•	. . ■ . - ·.
•	These arches and fire-works delighted the Ladies of
the Princess exceedingly; and, with their usual good
logic, they deduced from his taste for illuminations,
that the King of Bucharia would make the most exem-
plary husband imaginable. Nor, indeed, could Lalla
Rookh herself help feeling the kindness and splendour
with which the young.bridegroom welcomed her;—but
she also felt how painful , is the gratitude, which kind-
ness from those we cannot love excites; and. that their
best blandishments come over the heart with all that
chilling and deadly sweetness, which we can fancy in
the cold, odoriferous wind that is to blow over this
earth in the last days.
: The. marriage was fixed for the morning after her
arrival, when she was, for the first time, to be presented
to the monarch in that Imperial Palace beyond the
lake, called the Shalimar. Though a night of: more
wakeful and anxious thought had never been passed in
the Happy Valley, yet, when she rose in the morning
and her Ladies came round her, to assist in the adjust-
ment of the bridal ornaments, they thought they had
never seen her look half so beautiful. What she had
lost of the bloom and. radiancy of her charms was
more than made up by that intellectual expression,
that, soul in the eyes which is worth all the rest .of love-
liness. When they had tinged her fingers with the
Henna leaf, and placed upon her brow a small coronet
of jewels, of the shape worn by the ancient Queem of
Bucharia, they flung over her head the rose-colouKlt
bridal veil, and she proceeded to the barge that was to
convey her across the lake;—first kissing, with a moera*
ful look, the little amulet of cornelian which her fothet
had hung about her neck at parting.	>
The morning was as fair as the. maid upon whose
nuptials it rose, and the shining Lake, all covered with
boats, the minstrels playing upon the shores of the
islands, and the crowded summer-houses on the great
hills around, with shawls and banners waving from
their roofs, presented such a picture of animated re*
joicing, as only she, who was the object of it all, did
not feel with transport. To Lalla Rookh alone it
was a melancholy pageant; nor could she have even
borne to look upon the Scene, were it not for a hope
that, among the.crowds around, she might once more
perhaps catch a glimpse of Feramorz. So much was
her imagination haunted by this thought, that there
was scarcely an islet or boat she passed, at which her
heart did not flutter with a momentary fancy that he
was there. Happy, in her eyes, the humblest slave
upon whom the light of his dear iooks fellIn the
barge immediately after the Princess was Eapladexst}
jvith his silken curtains thrown widely apart, that all
might have the benefit of his august presence, and with
his head full of the speech he was to deliver to the
King, “ concerning Feramorz, and literature* and the
Chabuk, as connected therewith.”
. They had now entered the canal which leads from
the Lake to the splendid domes and saloons of the
Sbalimar, and glided on through gardens ascending
from each bank, full of flowering Shrubs that made tlte
air all perfume; while from the middle of the canal
rose jets of water, smooth and unbroken, to such a
daeeling height, that they stood like pillard of diamond
m the sunfehine. After sailing under the arches of
various saloons, they at length arrived at thee last and
most magnificent, where the iionarch awaited the.
/
coming of his bride; and such was the agitation of her
heart and frame, that it was with difficulty she walked
up the marble steps, which wire, covered with cloth of
gold for her ascent from the barge. At the end of the
hall stood two thrones, as precious as. the Cerulean
Throne of Koolburga, on one of which sat Alibis, the
youthful King of Bucharia, and on the other was, in a
few minutes, to be placed the most beautiful Princess
in the world. Immediately upon the entrance of
Lalla Rookh into the saloon, the monarch descended
from his throne to meet her; but, scarcely had he
time to take her hand in his, when she screamed with'
surprise and fainted at his feet. It was Feramorz
himself that stood before her!—Feramorz was, him-
self, the Sovereign of Bucharia, who in this disguise
had accompanied his young bride from Delhi, and,
having won her love as an humble minstrel, now amply
deserved to enjoy it as a King.
The consternation of Fadladeen at this discovery
was, for the moment, almost pitiable. But change
of opinion is a resource too convenient in courts
for this experienced courtier not to have learned
to avail himself of it. His criticisms were all, of
course, recanted instantly;- he was seized with an
admiration of the King's verses, as unbounded as, he
begged him to believe, it was disinterested; and the
following week saw him in possession of an additional
place, swearing by all the Saints of Islam that never
had there existed so great a poet as the Monarch,
Aliris, and ready to prescribe his favourite regimen
of the Chabuk for every man, woman, and child that
dared to think otherwise.
Of the happiness of the King and Queen of Bucharia,
after such a beginning, there can be but little doubt;
and, among the lesser symptoms, it is recorded of
Lalla Rookh, that, to the day of her death, in
memory of their delightful journey, she never called
the King by any other name than Feramorz.

NOTES.
Page 1.
These particulars of the visit of the King of Bucharia
to Aurungzebe are found in Dow's History of Hin~
dost an, vol. iii. p. 392.
Page 2.
Leila.
The mistress of Mejnoun, upon whose . story so
many Romances, in all the languages of the East, are
founded.
Page 2.
Shirine.
, For the loves of this celebrated beauty with Khosrou
and with Ferhad, v. D’Herbelot, Gibbon, Oriental Col-
lections, &c.
Page 2.
DewildS.
“ The history of the loves of Dewild£ and Chizer,
the son of the Emperor Alla, is written, in an elegant
poem, by the noble Chusero.”—Feriskta.
Page 3.
Those insignia of the Emperor’s favour, $c.
“ One mark of honour or knighthood bestowed by the
Emperor is the permission to wear a small kettledrum
at the bows of their saddles, which at first was invented
for the training of hawks, and to call them to the lure,
and is worn in the field by all sportsmen for that end."
Fryer’s Travels.
“ Those on whom the King has conferred the privi-
lege must wear an ornament of jewels on the right side
of the turban, surmounted by a high plume of the
feathers of a kind of egret. This bird is found only
in Cashmeer, and the feathers are carefully collected
for the King, who bestows them on his nobles."—
Elphinstones Account of Caubul.
Page 3.
Kheder Khan, SfC.
“ Kheder Khan, the Khakan, or King of Turquestan
beyond the Gihon (at the end of the eleventh century)
whenever he appeared abroad was preceded by seven
hundred horsemen with silver battle-axes, and was fol-
lowed by an equal number bearing maces of gold. He
was a great patron of poetry, and it was he who used
to preside at public exercises of genius, with four
basons of gold and silver by him to distribute amoBg
the poets who excelled."—Richardson’s Dissertation,
prefixed to his Dictionary.
Page 3.
The gilt pine-applcs, #c.
. . “ The kubdeh, a large golden knob, generally in the
shape of a pine-apple, on the top of the canopy over
the Utter or palanquin.”—Scott's notes on the Bahar-
danush.
Page 3.
The rose-coloured veils of the Princess’s litter.
. In the Poem of Zohair, in the Moallakat, there is
the following lively description of “ a company of
maidens seated on camels/’
. “ They are mounted in carriages, covered with costly
awnings, and with rose-coloured veils, the linings, of
which have the hue of crimson Andem-wood.
“ When they ascend from the bosom of the vale,
they sit forward on the saddle-cloths, with every mark
of a voluptuous gaiety.
“ Now, when they have reached the brink of yon
bilue gushing rivulet, they fix the poles of their tents
like the Arab with a settled mansion.”
Page 4.
A young female slave sat fanning her, SfC. ■
See Bernier’s description of the attendants on Rau-
chanara-Begum in her progress to Cashmere.
Page 4»
Religion, of which Aurungzebe was a munificent protector.
This hypocritical Emperor would have made a wor-
thy associate of certain Holy Leagues.*—“ He held the
cloak of religion (says Dow) between his actions and
the vulgar; and impiously thanked the Divinity for a
success which he owed to his own wickedness. When
he was murdering and persecuting his brothers and
their families, he was building a magnificent mosque at
Delhi, as an offering to God for his assistance to him
in the civil wars. He acted as high-priest at the con-
secration of this temple; and made a practice of at-
tending divine service there, in the humble dress of a
Fakeer. But when he lifted one hand to the Divinity,
he, with the other, signed warrants for the assassination
of his relations.”—History of Hindostan, vol. iii. p. 335.
See also the curious letter of Aurungzebe, given in the
Oriental Collections, vol. i. p. 320.
Page 5.
The diamond eyes of the idol, $c.
“ The Idol at Jaghernat has two fine diamonds for
eyes. No goldsmith is suffered to enter the Pagoda,
one having stole one of these eyes, being locked up all
eight with the Idol.”—Tavtmier.
Page 5.
Gardens of Shalimar.
See a description of these royal Gardens in “ An
Account of the present state of Delhi, by Lieut. W.
Franklin.”—Asiat. 'Research, vol. iv. p. 417.
<	-	Page	5.
Lake of Pearl. -
** In the neighbourhood is Notte Gill, or the Lake
of Pearl, which receives this name from its pellucid
water ”—Tennant’s Hindoostan.
“ Nasir Jung encamped in the vicinity of the Lake
of Tonoor, amused himself with sailing on that clear
and beautiful water, and gave it the fanciful name
of Motee Talab, 4 the Lake of Pearls,* which it still
retains."—Wilks’s South of India.
Page 5.
Described by one from the Isles of the West, fyc.
Sir Thomas Roe, Ambassador from James I. to Je-
hanguire.
Page 5.
Loves of Wamak and Ezra.
“ The romance Wemakweazra, written in Persian
verse, which contains the loves of Waftiak and Ezra,
two celebrated lovers who lived before the time of
Mahomet.”—Note on the Oriental Tales.
Page 5.
Of the fair-haired Zal, and his mistress, Rodahver.
Their amour is recounted in the Shah-Nam^h of
Ferdousi; and there is much beauty jn the passage
which describes the slaves of Rodahver, sitting on the
bank of the river arid throwing flowers into the stream,
in order to draw the attention of the young Hero who
is encamped on the opposite side.—v. Champion’s
Translation.
Page 5.
The combat of Rustam with the terrible white Damon.
Rustam is the Hercules of the Persians. For the
particulars of bis victory over the Sepeed Deeve, or
White Demon, v. Oriental Collections, vol. ii. p. 45.—
Near the city of Shirauz is an immense quadrangular
monument, in commemoration of this combat, called
The Kelaat-i-Deev Sepeed, or Castle of the White
Giant, which Father Angelo, in his Gazophylacium
Persicum, p. 127, declares to have been the most me*
morable monument of antiquity which he had seen in
Persia.—v. Ouseley’s Persian Miscellanies,
Page 6.
Their golden anklets.
“ The women of the Idol, or dancing girls of the
Pagoda, have little golden bells fastened to their feet,
the soft, harmonious tinkling of which vibrates in
unison with the exquisite melody of their voices.”—
Maurice’s Indian Antiquities.
“ The Arabian courtesans, like the Indian women,
have little golden bells fastened round their legs, neck
and elbows, to the sound of which they dance before
the King. The Arabian princesses wear golden rings
on their fingers, to which little bells are suspended, as
well as in the flowing tresses of their hair, that their
superior rank may be known, and they themselves
receive in passing the homage due to them."—v, Cal-
met’s Dictionary, art. Bells.
Page 7.
That delicious opium, #c.
“ Abou-Tige, ville de la Theba'ide, ou il croit beau-
coup de pavot noir, dont se fait le meilleur opium/’—
D’Herbelot.
Page 7-
That idol of women, Crishna.
“ He and the three Rdmas are described as youths
of perfect beauty; and the Princesses of Hindustdn
were all passionately in love with Crishna, who con-
tinues to this hour the darling God of the Indian
women.”—6’ir W. Jones, on the Gods of Greece, Italy,
and India.
Page 7.
The shawUgoat of Tibet.
See Turner’s Embassy for a description of this ani-
mal, “ the most beautiful among the whole tribe of
goats." The material for the shawls (which is carried
to Cashmere) is found next the skin.
Page 7.
The veiled Prophet of Khorassan.
For the real history of this Impostor, whose original
name was Hakem ben Haschem, and who was
called Mocanna from the veil of silver gauze (or, as
others say, golden) which he always wore, v. D’Her-
belot.
Page 9·
Flowrets and fruits blush over every stream.
“ The fruits of Meru are finer than those of any
other place; and one cannot see in any other city such
palaces, with groves, and streams, and gardens.”—
Ebn Haukal’s Geography.
P^ge 10.
Forfar less luminous, Sf-c.
. “ Ses disciples assuroient qu'il se couvroit le visage,
pour ne pas 6blouir ceux qui l’approchoit par l'6clat de
eon visage comme Moyse.”—D’Herbelot.
Page 10.
In hatred to the Caliph*s hue of night.
“ II faut remarquer ici touchant les habits blancs
des disciples de Hakem, que la couleur des habits, des
coeffures et des 6tendarts des Khalifes Abassides etant
la noire, ce chef de Rebelles ne pouvoit pas choisir
une, qui lui fftt plus ορροβέε.”—D'Herbelot.
Page 11.
Javelins of the light Khathaian reed. .
“ Our dark javelins, exquisitely wrought o/Khathaian
reeds, slender and delicate.”—Poem of Amru.
Page 11.
Filled with the stems that bloom on Iran’s rivers.
The Persians call this plant Gaz. The celebrated
shaft of Isfendiar, one of their ancient heroes, was
made of it.—“ Nothing can be more beautiful than
the appearance of this plant in flower during the rains
on the banks of rivers, where it is usually interwoven
with a lovely twining asclepias.”—Sir W. Jones? Bo-
tanical Observations on Select Indian Plants. 1
Page 11.
Like a cheriar-tree grave.
The oriental plane. “ The chenar is a delightful
tree; its bole is of a fine white and smooth bark; and
its foliage, which grows in a tuft at the summit, is of a
bright green.”—Morier’s Travels.
Page 13.
With turban'd heads of every hue and race,
Bowing before that veil'd and awful face.
Like tulip-beds......................	.
“ The name of tulip is said to be of Turkish ex-
traction, and given to the flower on account of its re-
sembling a turban."—Beckmann's History of Inventions.
Page IS.
With belt of broider d crape,
And fur-bound bonnet of Bucharian shape.
“ The inhabitants of Bucharia wear a round cloth
bonnet, shaped much after the Polish fashion, having
a large fur border. They tie their kaftans about the
middle with a girdle of a kind of silk crape, several
times round the body."—Account of Independent Tar-
tary, in Pinkerton’s Collection.
Page 13.
Wav’d, like the wings of the white birds, that fan
The flying Throne of star-taught Soliman.
This wonderful Throne was called The Star of the
Genii. For a full description of it, see the Fragment,
translated by Captain Franklin, from a Persian MS.
entitled “ the History of Jerusalem '.’’—Oriental Col-
lections, vol. i. p. 235. When Solomon travelled, the
eastern writers say, “ he had a carpet of green silk on
which his throne was placed, being of a prodigious
length and breadth, and sufficient for all his forces to
stand upon, the men placing themselves on his right
hand and the spirits on his left; and that when all were
in order, the wind, at his command, took up the carpet,
and transported it, with all that were upon it, wherever
he pleased; the army of birds at the same time flying
over their heads, and forming a kind of canopy to
shade them from the sun."—Sale’s Koran, vol. ii. p,
214, note.
Page 16.
.	.	.	.	and	thence	descending	flow’d
Through many a Prophet's breast.
' This is according to D’Herbelot’s account of the
doctrines of Mokanna, M Sa doctrine 6toit que Dieu
avoit pris une forme et figure humaine depuis qu'il eut
commandi aux Anges d'adorer Adam, le premier des
hommes. Qu’ apr&s la mort d'Adam, Dieu 6toit apparu
sous la figure de plusieurs Prophetes, et autres grands
hommes qu’il avoit choisis, jusqu' k ce qu'il prft celle
d’Abu Moslem, Prince de Khorassan, lequel professoit
1’erreur de la Tenassukhiah ou Metempschychose; et
qu’ apr&s la mort de ce Prince, la Divinit6 6toit pass£e,
■et descendue en sa personne.”
Page 34.
Such Gods as he,
Whom India serves, the monkey Deity.
“ Apes are in many parts of India highly venerated,
out of respect to the God Hannaman, a deity par-
taking of the form of that race.”—Pennant’s Hindoostan.
See a curious account in Stephen’s Persia of a solemn
embassy from some part of the Indies to Goa, when
the Portuguese were there, offering vast treasures for
the recovery of a monkey’s tooth, which they held in
great veneration, and which had been taken away upon
the conquest of the kingdom of Jafanapatan*
Page 34.
Where none but priests are privileged to trade
In that best marble of which Gods are made.
The material of which images of Gaudma (the Bir-
man Deity) is made, is held sacred. “ Birmans may
not purchase the marble in mass, but are suffered, and
indeed encouraged, to buy figures of the Deity ready
made/'—Symes’s Ava, vol. ii. p. 376.
Page 34.
-----proud things of clay,
To whom if Lucifer, as grandams say,
Refus'd, though at the forfeit of heaven's light,
To ftend in worship, Lucifer was right.
This resolution of Eblis not to acknowledge the new
creature, man, was, according to Mahometan tradi-
tion, thus adopted :—“ The earth (which God had se-
lected for the materials of his work), was carried into
Arabia, to a place between Mecca and Tayef, where,
being first kneaded by the angels, it was afterwards
fashioned by God' himself into a human form, and left
to dry for the space of forty days, or, as others say, as
many years; the angels, in the mean time, often visit-
ing it, and Eblis (then one of the angels nearest to
God’s presence* afterwards the devil) among the rest;
but he, not contented with looking at it, kicked it with
his foot till it rung, and knowing God designed that
creature to be his superior, took a secret resolution
never to acknowledge him as such.”—Sale on the
Koran.
Page 44.
The puny bird that dares, with teazing hum,
Within the crocodile's stretch'd jaws to come.
The humming-bird is said to run this risk for the
purpose of picking the crocodile’s teeth. The same
circumstance is related of the Lapwing, as a fact to
which he was witness, by Paul Lucas, Voyage fait
en 1714.
Page 48.
Some artists of Yamtcheou having been sent on previously.
“ The Feast of Lanterns is celebrated at Yamt-
cheou with more magnificence than any where else:
and the report goes, that the illuminations there are
so splendid, that an 'Emperor once, not daring openly
to leave his Court to go thither, committed himself with
the Queen and several Princesses of his family into the
hands of a magician, who promised to transport them
thither in a trice. He made them in the night to
ascend magnificent thrones that were borne up by swans,
which in a moment arrived at Yamtcheou. The
Emperor saw at his leisure all the solemnity» being
carried upon a cloud that hovered over the city and
descended by degrees; and came back again with the
same speed and equipage, nobody at court perceiving
his absence.”—-The present State of China, p. 156.
Page 48.
Artificial sceneries of bamboo-work.
See a description of the nuptials of Vizier Alee in the
Asiatic Annual Register of 1804.
Page 40.
The origin of these fantastic Chinese illuminations.
“ The vulgar ascribe it to an accident that happened
in the family of a famous mandarin, whose daughter
walking one evening upon the shore of a lake, fell in
and was drowned; this afflicted father, with his family,
run thither, and, the better to find her, he caused
a great company of lanterns to be lighted. All
the inhabitants of die place thronged after him with
torches. The year ensuing they made fires upon the
shore on the same day; they continued the cere-
mony every year, every one lighted his lantern, and
by degrees it commenced into a custom."—Present
State of China.
Page 5.1.
The Kohol’s jetty dye.
“ None of these ladies," says Shaw, “ take them-
selves to be completely dressed, till they have tinged
the hair and edges of their eyelids with the powder
of lead-ore. Now as this operation is performed by
dipping first into the powder a small wooden bojdkin
of the thickness of a quill, and then drawing it after·
wards, through the eyelids over the ball of the eye,
we shall have a lively image of what the Prophet (Jer.
iv. 30.) may be supposed to mean by rending the eyes
with painting. This practice is no doubt of great anti-
quity; for besides the instance already taken notice of,
we find that where Jezebel is said (2 Kings ix. 30) to
have painted her face, the original words, are, she ad-
justed her eyes with the powder of lead ore”—Shaw’s
Travels.
Page 55.
-------drop
About the gardens, drunk with that sweet food.
Tavernier adds, that while the Birds of Paradise lie
in this intoxicated state, the emmets come and eat off
their legs; and that hence it is they are said to have
no feet.
Page 60.
As they were captives to the King of Flowers.
“ They deferred it till the King of Flowers should
ascend his throne of enamelled foliage."—The Bahar-
danush.
Page 60.
But a light golden chain-work round her hair, <£c.
“ One of the head-dresses of the Persian women is
composed of a light golden chain-work, set with small
pearls, with a thin gold plate pendant, about the big-
ness of a crown-piece, on which is impressed an Ara-
bian prayer, and which hangs upon the cheek below
the ear."—Hanway’s Travels.
Page 62.
The maids of Yezd.
V Certainly the women of Yezd are the handsomest
women in Persia. The proverb is, that to live happy
a man must have a wife of Yezd, eat the bread of Yez-
decas, and drink the wine of Shiraz.”—Tavemier.
Page 67.
And his floating eyes—oh! they resemble
Blue water-lilies .......
“ Whose wanton eyes resemble blue water-lilies,
agitated by the breeze.”—Jayadeva.
I perceive there is a false rhyme in this song, which,
often as I have read it over, never struck me till this
moment.
Page 68.
To muse upon the pictures that hung round.
It has been generally supposed that the Mahometan»
prohibit all pictures of animals; but Toderini shews,
that though the practice is forbidden by the Koran,
they are not more averse to painted figures and images
than other people. From Mr. Murphy's work, too,
we find that the Arabs of Spain had no objection to
the introduction of figures into painting.
Page 69.
With her from Saba’s bowers, in whose bright eyes
He read, that to be bless’d, is to be wise.
“ In the palace which Solomon ordered to be built
against the arrival of the Queen of Saba, the floor of
pavement was of transparent glass, laid over running
water in which fish were swimming." This led the
Queen into a very natural mistake, which the Koran
has not thought beneath its dignity to commemorate.
“ It was said unto her, Enter the palace. And when
she saw it she imagined it to be a great water; and
she discovered her legs, by lifting up her robe to pass
through it. Whereupon Solomon said to her, Verily,
this is the place evenly floored with glass.”—Chap. 27.
Page 69.
Like her own radiant planet of the west,
Whose orb when half retir’d looks loveliest.
This is not quite astronomically true. “ Dr. Hadley
(says Keil) has shewn that Venus is brightest, when
she is about forty degrees removed from the sun; and
that then but only a fourth part of her lucid disk is to
be seen from the earth/’
Page 69.
Zuleika.
“ Such was the name of Potiphar’s wife, according
to the sura, or chapter of the Alcoran, which contains
the history of Joseph, and which for elegance of style
surpasses ^every other of the Prophet's books; some
Arabian writers also call her Rail. The passion which
this frail beauty of antiquity conceived for her young
Hebrew slave has given rise to a much esteemed poem
in the Persian language, entitled Yusef van Zelikha, by
Noureddin Jami; the manuscript copy of which in the
Bodleian Library at Oxford is supposed to be the finest
in the whole world/’—Note upon Nott's Translation of
Hafez.
Page 83.
The apples of Istakhar.
“ In the territory of Istakhar there is a kindi of
apple, half of which is sweet and half sour."—Ebn
Haukal.
Page 83.
They saw a young Hindoo girl upon the bank.
For an account of this ceremony, v. Qrandprk’s
Voyage in the Indian Ocean.
Page 84.
The Otontala or Sea of Stars.
“ The place where the Whangho, a river of Tibet,
rises, and where there are more than a hundred springs,
which sparkle like stars; whence it is called Hotun hor,
that is, the Sea of Stars/’-—Description of Tibet in
Pinkerton.
Page 86.
And camels, tufted o'er with Yemen's shells.
“ A superb camel, ornamented with strings and
tufts of small shells/’—AM Bey.
Page 86.
This City of War, which in a few short hours
Has sprung up here.
“ The Lescar, or Imperial Camp, is divided, like a
regular town, into squares, alleys, and streets, and from
a rising ground furnishes one of the most agreeable
prospects in the world. Starting up in a few hours in
an uninhabited plain, it raises the idea of a city built
by enchantment. Even those who leave their houses
in cities to follow the prince in his progress are fre-
quently so charmed with the Lescar, when situated in
a beautiful and convenient place, that they cannot pre-
vail with themselves to remove. To prevent this in-
convenience to the court, the Emperor, after sufficient
time is allowed to the tradesmen to follow, orders them
to be burnt out of their tents."—Dow's Hindostan.
Colonel Wilks gives a lively picture of an Eastern
encampment.—“ His camp, like that of most Indian
armies, exhibited a motley collection of covers from the
scorching sun and dews of the night, variegated accord-
ing to the taste or means of each individual by exten-
sive inclosures of coloured calico, surrounding superb
suites of tents; by ragged cloths or blankets stretched
over sticks or branches; palm leaves hastily spread
over similar supports; handsome tents and splendid
canopies; horses, oxen, elephants, and camels; all in-
termixed without any exterior mark of order or design,
except the flags of the chiefs,: which usually mark the
centres of a congeries of these masses; the only regu-
lar part of the encampment being the streets of shops,
each of which is constructed nearly in the manner of
a booth at an English fair.”—Historical Sketches of the
South of India.
Page 87.
The tinkling throngs
Of laden camels, and their drivers* songs.
“ Some of the camels have bells about their necks,
and some about their legs, like those which our carriers
put about their fore-horses’ necks, which together with
the servants (who belong to the camels, and travel on
.foot), singing all night, make a pleasant noise, and the
journey passes away delightfully/’—Pitt’s Account of
the Mahometans.
“ The camel-driver foHows the camels singing, and
sometimes playing upon has pipe; the louder he sings
and pipes, the faster the camels go. Nay, they will
stand still when he gives over his music.”—Tavemter.
Page 92.
Hot as that crimson haze
By which the prostrate caravan is aw’d.
Savary says of the south wind, which blows in Egypt
from February to May, “ Sometimes it appears only
in the shape of an impetuous whirlwind, which passes
rapidly, and is fatal to. the traveller, surprised in the
middle of the deserts. Torrents of burning sand roll
before it, the firmament is enveloped in a thick veil,
and the sun appears of the colour of blood. Some-
times whole caravans are buried in it."
Page 101.
—the pillar d Throne
Of Parviz.	1
There were said to be under this Throne or Palace
of Khosrou Parviz a hundred vaults filled with “ trea-
sures so immense, that some Mahometan writers tell
us, their Prophet, to encourage his disciples, carried
them to a rock, which at his command opened, and
gave them a prospect through it of the treasures of
Khosrou."—Universal History.
Page 102.
And they beheld an orb, ample and bright,
Rise from the Holy WeU.
. We. are not told more of this trick of the Impostor,
than that it was “ une machine, qu’il disoit £tre la
Lun'e." According to Richardson, the miracle is per-
petuated in Nekscheb.—“ Nakshab, the name of a
city in Transoxiania, where they say there is a well, in
which the appearance of the moon is to be seen night
and day."
Page 104.
On for the lamps that light yon lofty screen.
The tents of Princes were generally illuminated.
Norden tells us that the tent of the Bey of Girge was
distinguished from the other tents by forty lanterns
being suspended before it.—v. Harmer’s Observations
on Job.
Page 108.
Engines of havoc in, unknown before.
That they knew the secret of the Greek fire among
the Mussulmans early in the eleventh century appears
from Dow's Account of Mamood I. “ When he arrived
at Moultan, finding that the country of the Jits was
defended by great rivers, he ordered fifteen hundred
boats to be built, each of which he armed with six iron
spikes, projecting from their prows and sides, to prevent
their being boarded by the enemy, who were very ex-
. pert in that kind of war. When he had launched this
fleet, he ordered twenty archers into each boat, and five
others with fire-balls, to bum.the craft of the Jits, and
naptha to set the whole river on fire."
The agnee aster, too, in Indian poems, the Instrument
of Fire, whose flame cannot be extinguished, i» sup-
posed to signify the Greek Fire.—v. Wilks's South of
India, vol. i. p. 471.
The mention of gunpowder as in use among the
Arabians, long before its supposed discovery in Europe,
is introduced by Ebn Fadhl, the Egyptian geographer,
who lived in the thirteenth century. “ Bodies," he
says, “ in the form of scorpions, bound round and
filled with nitrous powder, glide along, making a gentle
noise; then, exploding, they lighten, as it were, and
burn. But there are others, which cast into the air
stretch along like a cloud, roaring horribly, as thun-
der roars, and on all sides vomiting out flames, burst,
bum and reduce to cinders whatever comes in their
way.” The historian Ben Abdalla, in speaking of
Abulualid in the year of the Hegira 712, says, “ A fiery
globe, by means of combustible matter, with a mighty
noise suddenly emitted, strikes with the force of light-
ning, and shakes the citadel."—v. the extracts from
Castri’s Biblioth. Arab. Hispan. in the Appendix to
Berington’s Literary History of the Middle Ages.
Page 108.
Discharge, as from a kindled naptha fount.
See Hanway’s Account of the Springs of Naptha at ·
Baku (which is called by Lieutenant Pottinger Joala
Mookhee, or the Flaming Mouth), taking fire and
running into the sea. Dr. Cooke in his Journal men-
tions some wells in Circassia, strongly impregnated
with this inflammable oil, from which issues boiling
water. “ Though the weather,” he adds, “ was now
very cold, the warmth of these wells of hot water pro-
duced near them the verdure and flowers of spring.”
Major Scott Waring says that naptha is used by the
Persians, as we are told it was in hell, for lamps.
many a row
Of starry lamps and blazing cressets, fed
With naptha and asphaltus, yielded light
As from a sky.
Page 116.
Thou seest yon cistern in the shade—’tis filtd
With burning drugs for this last hour distill’d.
“ 11 donna du poison dans le vin k tous ses gens,
et se jetta lui-m£me ensuite dans une cuve pleine de
drogues brftlantes et consumantes, afin qu’il ne rest&t
rien de tous les membres de son corps, et que ceux qui
restoient de sa secte pussent croire qu’il etoit mont6
au ciel, ce qui ne manqua pas d’arriver.”—D’Herbelot.
Page 124.
To eat any mangoes but those of Mazagong was, of course,
impossible.
The celebrity of Mazagong is owing to its man-
goes, which are certainly the best fruit I ever tasted.
The parent tree, from which all those of this species
have been grafted, is honoured during the fruit season
by a guard of sepoys; and, in the reign of Shah Jehan,
couriers were stationed between Delhi and the Mah-
ratta coast, to secure an abundant and fresh supply of
mangoes for the royal table.”—Mrs. Grant’s Journal of
a Residence in India*
Page 124.
His fine antique porcelain.
This old porcelain is found in digging, and “ if it is
esteemed, it is not because it has acquired any new
degree of beauty in the earth, but because it has re-
tained its ancient beauty; and this alone is of great
importance in China, where they give large sums for
the smallest vessels which were used under the Em-
perors Yan and Chun, who reigned many ages before
the dynasty of Tang, at which time porcelain began to
be used by the Emperors," (about the year 442.)—
Dunn's Collection of curious Observations, &c.—a bad
translation of some parts of the Lettres Edifiantee et
Curieuses of the Missionary Jesuits.
Page 130.
That sublime bird, which flies always in the air.
“ The Huma, a bird peculiar to the East. It is
supposed to fly constantly in the air, and never touch
the ground: it is looked upon as a bird of happy
omen; and that every head it overshades will in time
wear a crown."—Richardson.
In the terms of alliance made by Fuzzul Oola Khan
with Hyder in 1760, one of the stipulations was, “ that
he should have the distinction of two honorary attend-
ants standing behind him, holding fans composed of
the feathers of the humma, according to the practice
of his family."—Wilks's South of India. He adds in a
note;—** The Humma is a fabulous bird. The head
over which its shadow once passes will assuredly be
circled with a crown. The splendid little bird, sus-
pended over the throne of Tippoo Sultaun, found at
Seringapatam; in 1799» was intended to represent this
poetical fancy."
Page 130.
Whose words, like those on the Written Mountain, last
for ever.
“ To the pilgrims to Mount Sinai we must attribute
the inscriptions, figures, &c. on those rocks, which have
from thence acquired the name of the Written Moun-
tain.”—Volney. M. Gebelin and others have been at
much pains to attach some mysterious and important
meaning to these inscriptions; but Niebuhr, as well as
Volney, thinks that they must have been executed at
idle hours by the travellers to Mount Sinai, “ who were
satisfied with cutting the unpolished rock with any
pointed instrument; adding to their names and the
date of their journeys some rude figures, which bespeak
the hand of a people but little skilled in the arts/’—
Niebuhr.
Page 130.
FrQm the dark hyacinth to which Hafez compares his
mistress's hair.
Vide Nott’s Hafez, Ode v.
Page 13L.
To the Cdmalat&i by whose rosy blossoms the heaven of
Indra is scented.
“ The C4malat& (called by Linnaeus, Ipomaea) is the
most beautiful of its order, both in the colour and form
..of its leaves and flowers; its elegant blossoms are‘ce-
lestial rosy red, Love’s proper hue/ and have justly
procured it the name of Cdmalatd or Love's Creeper."
—Sir W. Jones. ‘
“ Cdmalatd may also mean a mythological plant, by
which all desires are granted to such as inhabit the
heaven of Indra; and if ever flower was worthy of
paradise, it is our charming Ipomaea.”—lb.
Page 132.
That Flower “loving Nymph, whom they worship in the
temples of Khathay.
Khathay, I ought to have mentioned before, is a
name for China. “ According to Father Premare in
his tract on Chinese Mythology, the mother of Fo-hi
was the daughter of heaven, surnamed Flower-loving;
and as the nymph was walking alone on the bank of
a river, she found herself encircled by a rainbow, after
which she became pregnant, and, at the end of twelve
years, was delivered of a son radiant as herself."—
Asiat. Res.
Page 135.
That blue flower which, Bramins say,
Blooms no where but in Paradise.
“ The Brahmins of this province insist that the blue
Campac flowers only in Paradise/'—Sir W. Jones. It
appears, however, from a curious letter of the Sultan
of Menangcabow, ‘given by Marsden, that one place
on earth may lay claim to the possession of it. “ This
is the Sultan, who keeps the flower Champaka that is
blue, and to be found in no other country but his,
being yellow elsewhere."—Marsden’s Sumatra.
’	A.
Page 136.
I know where the Isles of Perfume are.
Diodorus mentions the Isle of Panchaia, to the south
of Arabia Felix, where there was a temple of Jupiter.
This island, or rather cluster of isles, has disappeared,
“ sunk (says Grandpri) in the abyss made by the fire
•	beneath their foundations.”— Voyage to the Indian
Ocean.
I
Page 137.
Whose air is balm, whose ocean spreads
O'er coral rocks and amber beds, $c.
“ It is not like the Sea of India, whose bottom is
rich with pearls and ambergris, whose mountains of the
coast are stored with gold and precious stones, whose
gulfs breed creatures that yield ivory, and among
the plants of whose shores are ebony, red wood, and
the wood of Hairzan; aloes, camphor, cloves, sandal-
wood, and all other spices and'arbmatics; where par-
rots and peacocks are birds of the forest, and musk and
civct are-collected upon the lands.”—Travels of Two
Mohammedans.
Page 138.
Thy pillar’d shades.
.......................in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillar'd shade,
High over-arch’d, and echoing walks between. Milton.
For a particular description and plate of the Ban-
yan-tree, v. Cor diner s Ceylon.
Page 138.
Thy monarchs and their thousand thrones.
“ With this immense treasure Mamood returned to
Ghizni, and in the year 400 prepared a magnificent
festival, where he displayed to the people his wealth
in golden thrones and in other ornaments, in a great
plain without the city of Ghizni.’’-—Ferishta.
Page 140.
.	.	.	blood like this,
For Liberty shed, so holy is.
Objections may be made to my use of the word
Liberty, in this and more especially in the story that
follows it, as totally inapplicable^ to any state of things
that has ever existed in the East; but though I can-
not, of course, mean to employ it in that enlarged and
noble sense which is so well understood at the present
day, and, I grieve to say, so little acted upon, yet it
is no disparagement to the word to apply it to that
national independence, that freedom from the inter-
ference and dictation of foreigners, without which, in-
deed, no liberty of any kind can exist, and for which
both Hindoos and Persians fought against their Mus-
sulman invaders with, in many cases, a bravery that
deserved much better success.
Page 141.
Afric’s Lunar Mountains.
“ Sometimes called," says Jackson, “ Jibbel Kumrie,
or the white or lunar-coloured mountains; so a white
horse is called by the Arabians a moon-coloured horse.”
Page 144.
Only the fierce hycena stalks
Throughout the city’s desolate walks.
“ Gondar was full of hyaenas from the time it turned
dark till the dawn of day, seeking the different pieces
of slaughtered carcases, which this cruel and unclean
people expose in the streets without burial, and who
firmly believe that these animals are Falashta from the
neighbouring mountains, transformed by magic, and
come down to eat human flesh in the dark in safety.”
Bruce.
Page 146.
But see who yonder comes.
This circumstance has been often introduced into
poetry;—by Vincentius Fabricius, by Darwin, and
lately, with very powerful effect, by Mr. Wilson.
Page 153.
And, Jordan, those sweet banks of thine,
And woods, so full of nightingales.
“ The river Jordan is on both sides beset with little,
thick, and pleasant woods, among which thousands of
nightingales warble all together.”—Thevenot.
Page 155.
On the brink
Of a small imaret's rustic fount.
Imaret, “ hospice ou on loge et nourrit, gratis, les
p61erins pendant trois jours."—Toderini, translated by
the AbbS de Cournand.—v. also Castellan’s Moeurs des
Othomans, Tom. 5, p. 145.
Page 156.
The boy has started from the bed
Of flowers, where he had laid his head,
And down upon the fragrant sod
Kneels.
“ Such Turks as at the common hours of prayer are .
on the road, or so employed as not to find convenience
to attend the Mosques, are still obliged to execute that
duty; nor are they ever known to fail, whatever busi-
ness they are then about, but pray immediately when
the hour alarms them, whatever they are about, in that
very place they chance to stand on; insomuch that when
a janissary, whom you have to guard you up and down
the city, hears the notice which is given him from the
steeples, he will turn about, stand still, and beckon
with his hand, to tell his charge he must have patience
for a while; when, taking out his handkerchief, he
spreads it on the ground, sits cross-legged thereupon,
and says his prayers, though in the open market, which
having ended, he leaps briskly up, salutes the person
whom he undertook to convey, and renews his journey
with the mild expression of ghell gohnnum ghell, or,
Come, dear, follow me."—Aaron Hill’s Travels.
Page 158·.
The wild bees of Palestine.
> “ Wild bees, frequent in Palestine, in hollow trunks
or branches of trees, and the clefts of rocks. Thus it
is said (Psalm 81), “ honey out of the stony rock”—
Burder’s Oriental Customs.
Page 162.
In the note on this page, Chatillon should be Cas-
tellan.
Page 163.
The Banyan Hospital.
“ This account excited a desire of visiting the Ban-
yan Hospital, as I had heard much of their benevolence
to all kinds of animals that were either sick,1 lame, or
infirm, through age or accident. On my arrival there
were presented to my view many horses, cows, and
oxen, in one apartment; in another, dogs, sheep, goats,
and monkeys, with clean straw for them to repose on.
Above stairs were depositories for seeds of many sorts,
and flat, broad dishes for water, for the use of birds
and insects."—Parsons.
. It is said that all animals know the Banyans, that
the most timid approach them, and that birds will fly
nearer to them than to other people.—v. Grandprt.
Page 164.
Whose sweetness was not to be drawn forth, like that of
the fragrant grass near the Ganges, by crushing and
trampling upon them.
“ A very fragrant grass from the banks of the Ganges/
near Heridwar, which in some places covers whole
acres, and diffuses when crushed a strong odour."—
Sir W. Jones on the Spikenard of the Ancients.
Page l67.
Artisans in chariots.
Oriental Tales.
Page 167.
Waved plates of gold and silver flowers over their heads.
“ Or rather," says Scott, upon the passage of Fe-
rishta, from which this is taken, “ small coin, stamped
with the figure of a flower. They are still used
in India to distribute in charity, and, on occasion,
thrown by the purse-bearers of the great among the
populace."
Page 168.
His delectable alley of trees.
This road is 250 leagues in length. It has “ little
pyramids or turrets,” says Bernier, “ erected every half
league, to mark the ways, and frequent wells to afford
drink to passengers, and to water the young trees."
Pajge 170.
On the clear, cold waters of which floated multitudes of
the beautiful red lotus.
“ Here is a large pagoda by a tank, on the water of
which float multitudes of the beautiful red lotus: the
flower is larger than that of the white water-lily, and
is the most lovely of the nymphaeae I have seen.”-—
Mrs. Grant’s Journal of a Residence in India.
Page 172.
Who many hundred years since had fled hither from their
Arab conquerors.
“ On les voit pers6cut6s par les Khalifes se retirer dans
les montagnes du Kerman: plusieurs choisirent pour
retraite la Tartarie et la Chine; d'autres s’arrGt&rent
sur les bords du Gange, & Test de Delhi.”—M. Anquetil,
M6moires de l'Academie, tom. xxxi. p. 346.
Page 172.
As a native of Cashmere, which had in the same manner
become the prey of strangers.
“ Cashmere (say its historians) had its own Princes
4000 years before its conquest by Akbar in 1585.
Akbar would have found some difficulty to reduce this
Paradise of the Indies, situated as it is, within such a
fortress of mountains, but its monarch, Yusef Khan,
was basely betrayed by his Omrahs."—Pennant.
Page 173.
His stfiry of the Fire-worshippers.
Voltaire tells us that in his Tragedy “ Les Guebres,”
he was generally supposed to have alluded to the Jan-
senists; and I should not be surprised if this story of
the Fire-worshippers were found capable of a similar
doubleness of application.
Page 180.
Who, lull’d in cool kiosk or bower.
“ In the midst of the garden is the chiosk, that is,
a large room, commonly beautified with a fine fountain
in the midst of it. It is raised nine or ten steps, and
inclosed with gilded lattices, round which vines, jessa-
mines, and honeysuckles, make a sort of green wall:
large trees are planted round this place, which is the
scene of their greatest pleasures."—Lady M. W. Mon-
tagu.
Page 180.
Before their mirrors count the time.
The women of the East are never without their
looking-glasses. “ In Barbary/’ says Shaw, “ they are
so fond of their looking-glasses, which they hang upon
their breasts, that they will not lay them aside, even
when, after the drudgery of the day, they are obliged
to go two or three miles with a pitcher or a goat’s skin
to fetch water.”—Travels.
In other parts of Asia they wear little looking-glasses
on their thumbs. “ Hence (and from the lotus being
considered the emblem of beauty) is the meaning of
the following mute intercourse of two lovers before
their parents.
** He, with salute of deference due,
A lotus to his forehead prest;
She rais'd her mirror to his view,
Then turn'd it inward to her breast”
Asiatic Miscellany > vol. ii.
Page 182.
. . . . . th* untrodden solitude
Of Ararat's tremendous peak.
Struy says, “ I can well assure the reader that their
opinion is not true, who suppose this mount to be in-
accessible.” He adds that “'the lower part of the
mountain is cloudy, misty, and dark, the middlemost
part very cold and like clouds of snow, but the upper
regions perfectly calm.”—It was on this mountain that
the Ark was supposed to have rested after the Deluge,
and part of it they say exists there still, which Struy
' thus gravely accounts for;—“ Whereas none can re-
member that the air on the top of the hill did ever
change or was subject either to wind or rain, which is
presumed to be the reason that the Ark has endured
so long without being rotten.”—v. Carreri’s Travels,
where the Doctor laughs at this whole account of
Mount Ararat.
Page 191.
The Gheber belt that round him clung.
“ Pour se distinguer des Idolatres de Tlnde, les
Guebres se ceignent tous d'un cordon de laine, ou de
poil de chameau.”—EncyclopSdie Franfoise.
D'Herbelot says this belt was generally of leather.
Page 192.
Who mam and even
Hail their Creator's dwelling-place
Among the living lights of. Heaven.
“As to fire, the Ghebers place the. spring-head of it
in that globe of fire, the Sun, by them called Mythras,
or Mihir, to which they pay the highest reverence, in
gratitude for the manifold benefits flowing from its
ministerial omniscience. But they are so far from con-
founding, the subordination of the Servant with the
majesty of its Creator, that they not only attribute no
sort of sense or reasoning to the sun or fire, in any of
its operations, but consider it as a purely passive blind
instrument, directed and governed by the immediate
impression on it of the will of God; but they do not
even give that luminary, all glorious as it is, more than
the second rank amongst his works, reserving the first
for that stupendous production of divine power, the
mind of man."—Grose.—The false charges brought
against the religion of these people b)f their Mussul-
man tyrants is but one proof among many of the truth
of this writer’s remark, ** that calumny is often added
to oppression, if but for the sake of justifying it.”
Page 197.
That tree which grows over the tomb of the musician
Tan-Sein.
“ Within the enclosure which surrounds this monu-
ment (at Gualior) is a small tomb to the memory of
Tan-Sein, a musician of incomparable skill, who flou-
rished at the court of Akbar. The tomb is over-
shadowed by a tree, concerning which a superstitious
notion prevails, that the chewing of its leaves will give
an extraordinary melody to the voice."—Narrative of
a Journey from Agra to Ouzeiny by W. Hunter, Esq.
Page 197.
The awful signal of the bamboo-staff.
“ It is usual to place a small white triangular flag,
fixed to a bamboo staff of ten or twelve feet long, at
the place where a tiger has destroyed a man. It is
common for the passengers also to throw each a stone
or brick near the spot, so that in the course of a little
time a pile equal to a good waggon-load is collected.
The sight of these flags and piles of stones imparts a
certain melancholy, not perhaps altogether void of
apprehension."—Oriental Field Sports, vol. ii.
Page 198.
Beneath the shade some pious hands had erected, fyc.
“ The Ficus lndica is called the Pagod Tree and Tree
of Councils; the first from the idols placed under its
shade; the second, because meetings were held under
its cool branches. In some places it is believed to be
the haunt of spectres, as the ancient spreading oaks of
Wales have been of fairies: in others are erected be-
neath the shade pillars of stone, or posts, elegantly
carved and ornamented with the most beautiful porce-
lain to supply the use of mirrors.”—Pennant.
Page 200.
The nightingale now bends her flight.
“ The nightingale sings from the pomegranate-groves
in the day-time, and from the loftiest trees at night."
—Russel’s Aleppo.
Page 204.
Before whose sabre*s dazzling light, 8fC.
“ When the bright cimiters make the eyes of our
heroes wink."—The Moallakat, Poem of Amru.
Page 204.
As Lebanon’s small mountain-flood
Is rendered holy by the ranks
Of sainted cedars on its banks.
In the Lettres Edifiantes, there is a different cause
assigned for its name of Holy. “ In these are deep
caverns, which formerly served as so many cells for a
great number of recluses, who had chosen these retreats
as the only witnesses upon earth of the severity of their
penance. The tears of these pious penitents gave the
river of which we have just treated the name of the
Holy River.”—v. Chateaubriand’s Beauties of Chris-
tianity.
Page 208.
A rocky mountain o*er the sea
Of Oman beetling awfully.
This mountain is my own creation, as the “ stupen-
dous chain” of which I suppose it a link does not extend
quite so far as the shores of the Persian Gulf. “ This
long and lofty range of mountains formerly divided
Media from Assyria, and now forms the boundary of
the Persian and Turkish empires. It runs parallel with
the river Tigris and Persian Gulf, and almost disappear-
ing in the vicinity of Gomberoon (Harmozia) seems
once more to rise in the southern distriots of Kerman,
and following an easterly course through the centre of
Meckraun and Balouchistan, is entirely lost in the
desarts of Sinde.”—Kinneirs Persian Empire.
Page 209*
That bold were Moslem, who would dare
At twilight hour to steer his skiff
Beneath the Ghebers lonely cliff.
“ There is an extraordinary hill in this neighbour-
hood, called Koh6 Gubr or the Guebre's mountain.
It rises in the form of a lofty cupola, and on the sum-
mit of it, they say, are the remains of an Atush Kudu
or Fire Temple. It is superstitiously held to be the
residence of Deeves or Sprites, and many marvellous
stories are recounted of the injury and witchcraft suf-
fered by those who essayed in former days to ascend
or explore it.”—Pottingers Beloochistan.
Page 210.
Still did the mighty flame burn on.
“ At the city of Yezd in Persia, which is dis-
tinguished by the appellation of the Darflb Abadut, or
Seat of Religion, the Guebres are permitted to have an
Atush Kudu or Fire Temple (which, they assert, has
had the sacred fire in it since the days of Zoroaster) in
their own compartment of the city; but for this in-
diligence they are indebted to the avarice, not the
tolerance of the Persian government, which taxes them
at twenty-five rupees each man."—Pottinger’s Beloo-
chistan.
Page 214.
.	. while on that altar's fires
They swore.
“ Nul d’entre eux oseroit se perjurer, quand il a pris
& temoin cet 616ment terrible et vengeur.”—Encyclopi-
die Franfoise.
Page 215.
The Persian lily shines and towers.
“ A vivid verdure succeeds the autumnal rains, and
the ploughed fields are covered with the Persian lily,
of a. resplendent yellow colour.”—Russel's Aleppo.
Page 222.
Like Dead Sea fruits, that tempt the eye,
But turn to ashes on the lips.
“ They say that there are apple-trees upon the sides
of this sea, which bear very lovely fruit, but within are
all full of ashes.”—Thevenot. The same is asserted of
the oranges there; v. Witman’s Travels in Asiatic Turkey.
“ The Asphalt Lake, known by the name of the Dead
Sea, is very remarkable on account of the considerable
proportion of salt which it contains. In this respect
it surpasses every other known water on tbe surface of
the earth. This great proportion of bitter tasted salts
i» the reason why neither animal nor plant can live in
this water.”—Klaproth's Chemical Analysis of the Water
of the Dead Sea, Annals of Philosophy, January 1813.
Hasselquist, however, doubts the truth of this last as-
sertion, as there are shell-fish to be found in the lake.
Lord Byron has a similar allusion to the fruits of the
Dead Sea, in that wonderful display of genius, his
Third Canto of Childe Harold,—magnificent beyond
any thing, perhaps, that even he has ever written.
Page 222.
While lakes that shone in mockery nigh.
“ The Suhrab or Water of the Desert is said to be
caused by the rarefaction of the atmosphere from ex-
treme heat; and, which augments the delusion, it is
most frequent in hollows, where water might be ex-
pected to lodge. I have seen bushes and trees reflected
in it, with as much accuracy as though it had been the
face of a clear and still lake.”—Pottinger.
“ As to the unbelievers, their works are like a vapour
in a plain, which the thirsty traveller thinketh to be
water, until when he cometh thereto he findeth it to be
nothing.”—Koran, chap. 24.
Page 223..
A flower that the Bidmusk has just passed over.
“ A wind which prevails in February, called Bidmusk,
from a small and odoriferous flower of that name.”—
“ The wind which, blows these flowers commonly lasts
till the end of the month.”—Le Bruyn.
Page 223.
Where the sea-gipsies, who live for ever on the water.
“ The Biajiis are of two races; the one is settled on
Borneo, and are a rude but warlike and industrious
nation, who reckon themselves the original possessors
of the island of Borneo. The other is a species of sea-
gipsies or itinerant fishermen, who live in small covered
boats, and enjoy a perpetual summer on the eastern
ocean, shifting to leeward from island to island, with
the variations of the monsoon. In some of their cus-
toms this singular race resemble the natives of the
Maldivia islands. The Maldivians annually launch
a small bark, loaded with perfumes, gums, flowers, and
odoriferous wood, and turn it adrift at the mercy of
winds and waves, as an offering to the Spirit of the
Winds; and sometimes similar offerings are made to
the spirit whom they term the King of the Sea. In
like manner the Biajiis perform their offering to the
god of evil, launching a small bark, loaded with all the
sins and misfortunes of the nation, which are imagined
to fall on the unhappy crew that may be so unlucky
as first to meet with it."—Dr. Leyden on the Languages
and Literature of the Indo-Chinese Nations.
Page 223.
The violet sherbets.
“ The sweet-scented violet is one of the plants most
esteemed, particularly for its great use in Sorbet, which
they make of violet sugar.”—Hasselquist.
“ The sherbet they most esteem, and which is drank
by the Grand Signor himself, is made of violets and
sugar.”—Tavernier.
Page 224.
The pathetic measure of Nava.
“ Last of all she took a guitar and sung a pathetic
air in the measure called Nava, which is always used
to express the lamentations of absent lovers.”—Persian
Tales.
Page 227.
Her ruby rosary.
“ Le Tespih, qui est un chapelet, compost de 99
petites boules d’agathe, de jaspe, d’ambre, de corail, ou
d’autre matiere precieuse. J’en ai vu un superbe au
Seigneur Jerpos; il 6toit de belles et grosses perles
parfaites et 6gales, estim6 trente mille piastres.”—
Toderini.
Page 247·
A silk dyed, with the blossoms of the sorrowful tree Nilica.
“ Blossoms of the sorrowful Nyctanthe give a dura-
ble colour to silk."—Remarks on the Husbandry of
Bengal, p. 200.—Nilica is one of the Indian names of
this flower.—Sir W. Jones.—The Persians call it Gul.
—Carreri.
Page 261.
When pitying heaven to roses turn’d
The death-flames that beneath him burrid.
Of their other Prophet, Zoroaster, there is a story
told in Dion Prusaus, Orat. 36, that the love of wisdom
and virtue leading him to a solitary life upon a moun-
tain, he found it one day all in a flame, shining with
celestial fire, out of which he came without any harm,
and instituted certain sacrifices to God, who, he de-
clared, then appeared to him.—v. Patrick on Exodus,
iii. 2.
Page 290.
They were now not far from that Forbidden River.
“ Akbar on his way ordered a fort to be built upon
the Nilab, which he called Attock, which means in the
Indian language Forbidden; for, by the superstition of
the Hindoos, it was held unlawful to cross that river."—
Dow’s Hindostan.
Page 291.
'Resembling, she often thought, that people of Zinge.
“ The inhabitants of this country (Zinge) are never
afflicted with sadness or melancholy: on this subject
the Sheikh Abu-aUKheir-Azhari has the following
distich:
“ Who is the man without care or sorrow (tell) that
I may rub my hand to him.
(Behold) the Zingians, without care or sorrow, fro-
licksome with tipsiness and mirth.”
“ The philosophers have discovered that the cause of
this cheerfulness proceeds from the influence of the star
Soheil or Canopus, which rises over them every night.”
.—Extract from a geographical Persian Manuscript called
Heft Aklim, or the Seven Climates, translated by W.
Ouseley, Esq.
Page 292.
About two miles from Hussun Abdaul were the Royal
Gardens.
Iam indebted for these particulars of Hussun Abdaul
to the very interesting Introduction of Mr. Elphin-
stone’s work Upon Caubul.
Page 292.
Putting to death soone hundreds of those unfortunate
lizards.
“ The lizard Stellio. The Arabs call it Hardun. The
Turks kill it, for they imagine that by declining the
head it mimics them when they say their prayers.”—
Hasselquist.
•	Page 293.
As the Prophet said of Damascus, “ it was too delicious.n
“ As you enter at that Bazar without the gate of
Damascus, you see the Green Mosque, so called be-
cause it hath a steeple faced with green glazed bricks,
which render it very resplendent; it is covered at top
with a pavilion of the same stuff. The Turks say this
mosque was made in that place, because Mahomet
being come so far, would not enter the town, saying it
was too delicious.”—Thevenot.—This reminds one of the
following pretty passage in Isaac Walton:—“ When I
sat last on this primrose bank and looked down these
meadows, I thought of them as Charles the Emperor
did of the City of Florence, * that they were too plea-
sant to be looked on, but only on holidays.’"
Page 294.
Would remind the Princess of that difference, $c.
“ Haroun A1 Raschid, cinquieme Khalife des Abas-
sides, s’6tant un jour brouill6 avec une de ses mattresses
nomm£e Maridah, qu’il aimoit cependant jusqu’& l’ex-
cfcs, et cette mesintelligence ayant d6j& dur6 quelque
tems commenpa k s’ennuyer. Giafar Barmaki, son
favori, qui s’en apperput, commanda a Abbas ben Ah-
naf, excellent Pofete de ce tems 14 de composer quelques
vers sur le sujet de cette brouillerie. Ce Pofcte execufa
l’ordre de Giafar, qui fit chanter ces vers par Moussaii
en presence du Khalife, et ce Prince fut tellement
touchy de la tendresse des vers du poete et de la dou-
ceur de la voix du musicien qu’il alia aussi-tdt trouver
Maridah, et fit sa paix avec elle.”—D’Herbelot..
Page 300.
Where the silken swing.
** The swing is a favourite pastime in the East, as
promoting a circulation of air, extremely refreshing
in those sultry climates."—Richardson.
“ The swings are adorned with festoons. This pas-
time is accompanied with music of voices and of
instruments, hired by the masters of the swings.”—
Thevenot.
Page 312.
The basil tuft that waves
Its fragrant blossoms over graves.
“ The women in Egypt go, at least two days in the
week, to pray and weep at the sepulchres of the dead;
and the custom then is to throw upon the tombs a sort
of herb, which the Arabs call rihan, and which is our
sweet basil."—Maillet, Lett. 10.
Page 315.
The mountain-herb that dyes
The tooth of the fawn like gold.
Niebuhr thinks this may be the herb which the
Eastern alchymists look to as a means of making gold.
“ Most of those alchymical enthusiasts think them-
selves sure of success, if they could but find out the
herb, which gilds the teeth and gives a yellow colour to
the flesh of the sheep that eat it. Even the oil of this
plant must be of a golden colour. It is called Has-
chischat ed dab"
Father Jerom Dandini, however, asserts that the
teeth of the goats at Mount Libanus are of a silver
colour; and adds, “ this confirms me that which 1 ob-
served in Candia; to wit, that the animals that live on
Mount Ida eat a certain herb, which renders their teeth
of a golden colour ; which, according to my judgment,
cannot otherwise proceed than from the mines which
are under ground.”—Dandini, Voyage to Mount Li-
banus.
Page 318.
’Tis I that mingle in one sweet measure
The past, the present and future of pleasure.
** Whenever our pleasure arises from a succession of
sounds, it is a perception of complicated nature, made
up of a sensation of the present sound or note, and an
idea or remembrance of the foregoing, while their mix-
ture and concurrence produce such a mysterious de-
light, as neither could have produced alone. And it is
often heightened by an anticipation of the succeeding
notes. Thus Sense, Memory, and Imagination, are
conjunctively employed:”—Gerrard on Taste.
This is exactly the Epicurean theory of Pleasure, as
explained by Cicero. “ Quo circa corpus gaudere tam-
diu, dum praesentem sentiret voluptatem; animum et
praesentem percipere pariter cum corpore et prospicere
venientem, nec praeteritam praeterfluere sinere."
Madame de Stael accounts upon the same principle
for the gratification we derive from rhyme:—“ Elle est
Timage de l’esp6rance et du souvenir. Un son nous fait
d6sirer celui qui doit lui repondre, et quand le se-
cond retentit il nous rappelle celui qui vient de nous
6chapper."
Page 319.
'Tis dawn, at least that earlier dawn,
Whose glimpses are again withdrawn.
“ The Persians have two mornings, the Soobhi Kazim
and the Soobhi Sadig, the false and the real day-
break. They account for this phenomenon in a most
whimsical manner. They say that as the sun rises from
behind the Kohi Qaf (Mount Caucasus) it passes a
hole perforated through that mountain, and that dart-
ing its rays through it, it is the cause of the Soobhi
Kazim, or this temporary appearance of daybreak.
As it ascends, the earth is again veiled in darkness,
until the sun rises above the mountain and brings with
it the Soobhi Sadig, or real morning.”—Scott Waring.
He thinks Milton may allude to this, when he says
Ere the blabbing Eastern scout,
The nice mom on the Indian steep
From her cabin'd loop-hole peep.
Page 321.
held a feast
In his magnificent Shalimar.
“ In the centre of the plain, as it approaches the
Lake, one of the Delhi Emperors, I believe Shah Je-
han, constructed a spacious garden called the Shalimar,
which is abundantly stored with fruit-trees and flowering
shrubs. Some of the rivulets which intersect the plain
are led into a canal at the back.of the garden, and,
flowing through its centre, or occasionally thrown into
a variety of water-works, compose the chief beauty of
the Shalimar. To decorate this spot the Mogul Princes
of India have displayed an equal magnificence and
taste; especially Jehan Gheer, who, with the enchant-
ing Noor Mahl, made Kashmire his usual residence
during the summer months. On arches thrown over the
canal are erected, at equal distances, four or five suites
of apartments, each consisting of a saloon, with four
rooms at the angles, where the followers of the court
attend, and the servants prepare sherbets, coffee, and
the hookah. The frame of the doors of the principal
saloon is composed of pieces of a stone of a black
colour, streaked with yellow lines, and of a closer gram
and higher polish than porphyry. They were taken,
it is said, from a Hindoo temple, by one of the Mogul
princes, and are esteemed of great value."—Forster.
Page 328.
And oh, if there be, $c.
“ Around the exterior of the Dewan Khass (a build-
ing of Shah A Hum’s) in the cornice are the following
lines in letters of gold upon a ground of white marble
-—* If there be a paradise upon earth, it is this, it is
this’”—Franklin.	,
Page 337.
Like that painted porcelain.
“ The Chinese had formerly the art of painting on
the sides of porcelain vessels fish and other animals,
which were only perceptible when the vessel was full
of some liquor. They call this species Kia-tsin, that
is, azure is put in press, on account of the manner in'
which the azure is laid on."—“ They are every now
and then trying to recover the art of this magical
painting, but to no purpose."—Dunn.
Page 338.
More perfect than the divinest images in the House of
Azor.
An eminent carver of idols, said in the Koran to
be father to Abraham. “ I have such a lovely idol as
is not to be met with in the house of Azor.”—Hafiz.
Page 339.
The grottos, hermitages, and miraculous fountains.
“ The pardonable superstition of the sequestered in-
habitants has multiplied the places of worship of Ma-
badeo, of Beschan, and of Brama. All Cashmere is
holy land, and miraculous fountains abound/’—Major
Renners Memoirs of a Map of Hindostan.
Jehanguire mentions “ a fountain in Cashmire called
Tirnagh, which signifies a snake; probably because
some large snake had formerly been seen there.”—
“ During the lifetime of my father, I went twice to
this fountain, which is about twenty coss from the city
of Cashmeer. The vestiges of places of worship and
sanctity are to be traced without number amongst the
ruins and the caves, which are interspersed in its neigh-
bourhood.”—Toozek Jehangeery.—v. Asiat. Misc. vol. 2.
There is another account of Cashmere by Abul-
Fazil, the author of the Ayin-Acbaree, “ who,” says
Major Rennet, “ appears to have caught some of the
enthusiasm of the Valley, by his descriptions of the
holy places in it.”
Page 339·
Whose houses roof’d with flowers,
“ On a standing roof of wood i? laid a covering of
fine earth, which shelters the .building from the great
quantity of snow that falls in the winter season. This
fence communicates an equal warmth in winter, as a
refreshing coolness in the summer season, when the tops
of the houses, which are planted with a variety of
flowers, exhibit at a distance the spacious view of a
beautifully chequered parterre."—Forster.	,
Page 340.
Lanterns of the triple-coloured tortoise-shell of Pegu*
“ Two hundred slaves there are, who have no other
/
office than to hunt the woods and marshes for triple-
coloured tortoises for the King's Vivary. Of the shells
of these also lanterns are made."—Vincent, le. Blanc's
Travels.
The meteors of the north, as they are seen by those
For a description of the Aurora Borealis as it ap-
pears to these hunters, v. Encyclopedia.
This wind, which is to blow from Syria Damascena,
is, according to the Mahometans, one of the signs of
the Last Day's approach.
Another of the signs is, “ Great distress in the world,
so that a man when he passes by another’s grave shall
say, would to God I were in his place!"—Sale’s Preli-
minary Discourse.
Page 340.
The Cerulean Throne of Koolburga.
“ On Mahommed Shaw's return to Koolburga (the
Page 340.
hunters.
Page 340.
The cold, odoriferous wind.
capital of Dekkan), he made a great festival, and
mounted this throne with much pomp and magnifi-
cence, calling it Firozeh or Cerulean. I have heard
some old persons, who saw the throne Firozeh in
the reign of Sultan Mamood Bhamenee, describe it.
They say that it was in length nine feet, and three in
breadth; made of ebony, covered with plates of pure
gold, and set with precious stones of immense value.
Every prince of the house of Bhamenee, who possessed
this Throne, made a point of adding to it some rich
stones, so that when in the reign of Sultan Mamood
it was taken to pieces, to remove some of the jewels to
be set in vases and cups, the jewellers valued it at one
corore of oons (nearly four millions sterling). I learned
also that it was called Firozeh from being partly ena-
melled of a sky-blue colour, which was in time totally
concealed by the number of jewels.”—Ferishta.
the END.