PREFACE.
The Sceptical Philosophy of the Ancients
has been as much misrepresented as the Epi-
curean. Pyrrho perhaps may have carried
it to an irrational excess (though we must
not believe, with Beattie, all the absurdi-
ties imputed to this philosopher), but it ap-
pears to me that the doctrines of the school,
as stated by Sextus Empiricus*, are much
more suited to the frailty of human reason,
and more conducive to the mild virtues of
humility and patience, than any of those
systems which preceded the introduction of
Christianity. The Sceptics held a middle
path between the Dogmatists and Academi-
*	Pyrrh. Hypoth. The reader may find a tolerably clear
abstract of this work of Sextus Empiricus in La Verit6
des Sciences, by Mersenne, liv. i. chap. ii. 8tc.

clans, the former of whom boasted that
they had attained the truth, while the latter
denied that any attainable truth existed: the
Sceptics, however, without asserting or de-
nying its existence, professed to be modestly
and anxiously in search of it; as St. Augus-
tin expresses it, in bis liberal tract against the
Manichaeans, “ nemo nostrum dicat jam se
invenisse veritatem; sic earn quse ramus quasi
ab utrisque nesciatur*.” From this habit of
impartial investigation, and the necessity
which they imposed upon themselves, of
studying not only every system of philo-
sophy, but every art and science, which
pretended to lay its basis in truth, they ne-
cessarily took a wider range of erudition,
and were more travelled in the regions of
philosophy than those whom conviction or
bigotry had domesticated in any particular
system. It required^all the learning of dog-
matism to overthrow the dogmatism of
*	Lib. contra Epist. Manichaei quam vocant Funda-
menti, Op. Paris, tom. vi.
learning; ahd the Sceptics, in this respect,
resembled that ancient incendiary, who stole
from the altar the fire with which he de-
stroyed the temple. This advantage over all
the other sects is allowed to them even by
Lipsius, whose treatise on the miracles of
the Virgo Hallensis will sufficiently save him
from all suspicion of scepticism. “ Labore,
ingenio, memoria supra omnes pene philo-
sophos fuisse.--------Quid nonne omnia alio-
rum secta tenere debuerunt et inquirere, si
poterunt refellere? res dicit. Nonne ora-
tiones varias, raras, subtiles inveniri ad tam
receptas, claras, certas (ut videbatur) sen-
tentias evertendas)" &c. &c. *. Manuduct.
ad Philos oph. Stoic. Dissert. 4.
The difference between the scepticism of
the ancients and the moderns is, that the
former doubted for the purpose of investi-
*	See Marlin. Schoockius de Scepticismo, who endea-
vours, I think weakly, to refute this opinion of Lipsius. ^
gating, as may be exemplified by the third
book of Aristotle’s Metaphysics*', while the
latter investigate for the purpose of doubt-
ing, as may be seen through most of the
philosophical works of Hume ·}*. Indeed
the Pyrrhonism of latter days is not only
more subtle than that of antiquity, but, it
must be confessed, more dangerous in it»
tendency. The happiness of a Christian
depends so much upon his belief, that it is
natural he should feel alarm at the progress
of doubt, lest it steal by degrees into the
region, from which he is most interested in
excluding it, and poison at last the very
spring of his consolation and hope. Still,
however, the abuses of doubting ought not
* Er/ it tok tviropnoui βνλομη&ς vrpvffu το iutxop*?eti χαλ«$.—
Metaphys. lib. iii. cap. 1.
. + Neither Hume, however, nor Berkeley, are to be
judged by the misrepresentaions of Beattie, whose book,
however amiably intended, appears to me a most unphilo-
' sopbical appeal to popular feelings and prejudices, and a
continued petitio principii throughout.
to deter a philosophical mind from indulging
mildly and rationally in its use; and there
is nothing, I think, more consistent with
the humble spirit of Christianity, than the
scepticism of him, who professes not to
extend his distrust beyond the circle of
human pursuits, and the pretensions of
human knowledge. A philosopher of this
kind is among the readiest to admit the
claims of Heaven upon his faith and adora-
tion : it is only to the wisdom of this weak
world that he refuses, or at least delays, his
assent; it is only in passing through the
shadow of earth that his mind undergoes
the eclipse of scepticism. No follower of
Pyrrho has ever spoken more strongly against
the dogmatists than St. Paul himself, in the
First Epistle to the Corinthians; and there
are passages in Ecclesiastes and other parte
of Scripture, which justify our utmost dif-
fidence in all that human reason originates.
Even the Sceptics of antiquity refrained
from the mysteries of. theology, and, in
entering the temples of religion, hid aside
their philosophy at the porch. Sextus Em-
piricus thus declares the acquiescence of his
sect in the general belief of a superintend-
ing Providence:	Τ» βιω noem)to>#&wtts
α&οζαςως φαμαι uveu Βί*ς xeci νιβόταν Βί*ς χαι πςοχχιχ
οαπνς <ρ<β(α{ν. Lib. iii. cap. I. In short, it
appears to me that this rational and well-
regulated scepticism is the only daughter
of the schools, that can be selected as a
handmaid for Piety: he, who distrusts the
light of reason, will be the first to follow a
more luminous guide; and if, with an
ardent love for truth, he has sought her in
vain through the ways of this life, he will
turn with the more hope to that better
world, where all is simple, true, and ever-
lasting : for there is no parallax at the
zenith—it is only near our troubled horizon
that objects deceive us into vague and erro*
neous calculations.

THt
SCEPTIC,
&c.
As the gay tint, that decks the vernal rose*,
Not in the flower, but in our vision glows;
*“ The particular bulk, number, figure, and'motion
of the parts of fire or snow are really in them, whether
any one perceive them or not, and therefore they may be
called reqtl qualities, because they really exist in those bo^
dies; but light, heat, whiteness, or coldness, are no more
really in diem than sickness or pain is in manna· T$ke
away the sensation of them; let not the eye see light or
colours, nor the ears hear sounds; let the palate not ftsfe,
nor the nose smell, and all colours, tastes, odours, and
sounds, as they are such particular ideas, vanish and
cease.” Locke, book ii. chap. 8.
Bishop Berkeley, it is well known, extended this doc-
trine even to primary qualities, and supposed that matter
itself
As the ripe flavour of Falernian tidef
Not in the wine, but in our taste resides;.
So when, with heartfelt tribute, we declare
That Marco *8 honest and that Susan V fair,
*T is in our minds, ind not in Susan’s eyes
Or Marco's life, the worth or beauty lies:
For she, in flat-nos’d China, would appear
As plain a thing as Lady Anne is here;
And (Hie light joke at rich Loretto’s dome
Would rank good Marco with the damn’d at Rome·'·
! «
There’s no deformity so vile, so base,
That 9t is not somewhere thought a charm, a grace %
itself has but an ideal existence. How shall we apply the
Bishop’s theory to that period which preceded the forma-
tion of man, tvhen out system of sensible things was pro-
duced, and the sun shone, and the waters flowed, without
any sentient being to witness diem ? The spectator, whom
Whistpn supplies, will scarcely solve die difficulty: “ To
speak my mind freely," says he, “ I believe that the Mes-
aias was there actually present/’—»See Whistofi, of the
JAome Creation.
*No foul reproach, that may not steaj 4a beam
From other suns, to bleach it to esteem * \
*	Boetius employs thin argument of the Sceptics^ among
hie «consolatory reflections upon the emptiness of f*m*.
“ Quid quod diversarum geqtiupn mores inter se atque instil
tuta discordant, ut quod apud alios laude, apud alios supplido
dignum judicetur Γ—Lib. ii. prosa 7.—Many amusing in-
stances of diversity, in the tastes, manners, and morals of
different nations, may be found throughout the vrosks of that
interesting Sceptic Le Mothele Vayer.—See his Opuscule
Sceptique, his treatise u de la Secte Scepti<jue,” fnd,
above tffl, those JJHaJogyes, not to be found in his works,
which he published under the name of Horatius Tubero.—
The chief objection to these writings of Le Vayer (and fr
is a blemish which, I think, may be felt in the Esprit des
Loix), is the suspicious obscurity of die sources, from
which he frequendy <lraws his instances, and the jndiscri-
- ' - l\ ’ * _
mlnate use wlich he makes of the lowest jpopulace of the
library, those lying travellers and wopder-mongers, of whom
Shaftesbury complains, in liis Advice to an Author, as
having tended in his own time to the diffusion of a very
vicious sort of scepticism. Vol. i. p. 352. The Pyr-
rhonism of Vayer, however, is of the most ^nnocent
and playful kind; aud Villemandy, the author of Scepti-
cismus Debellatus, exempts him specially in the declara-
tion of War, which he denounces against the other armed
*	neutrals
Ask, who is wise ?—you ’11 find the self-same map
A sage in France, a madman in Japan;
And here some head beneath a mitre swells,
Which there had tingled to a cap and bells:
Nay, there may yet some monstrous region be,
Unknown- to Cook, ^nd from Napoleon free.
Where C—rstler—-gh would for a patriot pass,
And mouthing M—-Igr—-ve scarce be deem’d an
< ass!
** List not to rpaspn,” (Epicurus cries,)
“ Bqt tr^st the eenses, there conviction lies*:”—
neutrals of the sect, in consideration of t}ie orthodox lfc·
mits, within which he has confined his incredi^lity.
*	This was also the. creed of those modern Epicurean*,
whom Ninon de l’Enclos collected around heip in the Rue
des Tournelles, and whose object seems to have been to
decry the faculty of reason, as tending only to embarrasf
our use of pleasures, without enabling us, in any degree,
to avoid their abuse. Madame des Houlieres, the fair
pupil of Des Barreaux in the arts of poetry and voluptu-
ousness, ha? devoted most of her verses to this laudable
purpose, and is such a determined foe to reason, that, in
one
< - .
Alas! they judge not by a purer light,
%
'V
$Tor keep their fountains more unting’d and bright;
Habit so mars them, (hat the Russian swaiq
Will sigh for train-oil, while he sips Champaigne;
And health sq rules them, that a fever’s heat 1
Would make ey’n Sh—r—d-rr-n think water sweet!
pne of her Pastorals, she congratulates her sheep on the
yant of if. St. Evremont speaks thus upon the subject;
“ Un melange incertain d’esprit et de matiire
Nous fait vivre avec trop ou trop peu de lumtere.
Native, eldve nous ά la clarte des anges,
Ομ nous abbaisse au sens des simples animae*”
^Yhich sentiments 1 have thus ventur’d to paraphrase:
Had man been made, at nature’s birth,
Of only flame or only earth,
Had he been form’d a perfect whole
Of purely that, or grossly this.
Then sense would ne’er have clouded soul,
Nor soul restrain’d the sense’s bliss·
. Ob happy! had his light been strong,
Or had he never shar’d a light,
Which burns enough to shew he’s wrong.
Yet not enough to lead him right!
Just as the mind the erring sense * believes,
The erring mind, in turn, the sense deceives,
*	See those verses upon the fallaciousness of die senses,
beginning “ Fallunt nos pculi,” See. among the frugtnents
pf Petronius. The most sceptical of the aprient poets
was Euripides, and I defy the whole school of Pyrrho to
produce a more ingenious doubt than the following:
•T*; ϊοώι» ii £iiy o KixXnTott dettcif
To fw it drumuiy m·—See Laert. In Fjrrh.
Socrates and Plato were the grand source* of ascient
scepticism. Cicero tells us (de Orator, lib. iii.), .that they
supplied Arcesilas with the doctrines of the Middle Aca-
demy; and how much these resembled the tenets of the
Sceptics, may be seen even in Sextus Empiricus (lib. i.
cap. 33), who, with all his distinctions, can scarcely prove
any difference. One is sorry to find that Epicurus was a
dogmatist; and I rather think his natural temper;would
have led him to the repose of scepticism, if the Stoics, by
their violcftt opposition, had not forced him to be as obsti-
nate as themselves. Indeed Plutarch, m reporting some
of his opinions, represents him as delivering them with
considerable hesitation.	win axoyiwvxu τοντ·*, ιχο.
μηος του ινλχομίηυ. De Placit. Philosoph. lib. ii. cap. 13.
See also the <21st and 22d chapters. But that the leading
characteristics of the sect were self-sufficiency and dogma-
tism
And cold disgust can find but wrinkles there^
Where passion fancies all that’s smooth and fain
*****, who sees, upon his pillow laid, ■;
A face, for which ten thousand pounds were paid/-
Can tell, how quick before a jury flies
The spell that mock’d the warm seducer’s eyes J
Self is the medium,- least refin’d of all
Through which opinion’s searching beam cati fall
And, passing there,-the clearest; steadiest ray
Will tinge its light and turn its line astray.
Th’ Ephesian smith a holier charm espied	.
In Dian’s toe, than all his heaven beside*)
tiam, appears from what Cicero says of Velleius, De Na-
tur. Deor.—“ Turn Velleius, fidentur san£, ut solent isti,
nihil tam verens quam ne dubitare aliqui de re videretur.”
*	See Acts, chap. xix.; where every line reminds one of
those reverend craftsmeu who are so ready to cry out “ The:
church is in danger!”	..	..............
“ For a certain man, named Demetrius, a silver-
smith, which made silver shiines for Diana, brought-
no «mall gun unto the craftsmen:
.	**	Whom
And true religion shines not half so true
On one good living as it shines on two.
Had W-*—lc—t first been pension’d by the Throne>
Kings would have suffer’d by his praise alone;
And P—ine perhaps, for something snug per ann.,
Had laugh*d,like W—«-11—sly, at all Rights of Man! .
But *t is not only individual minds
That habit tinctures, or that interest blinds $
Whole nations, fool’d by falsehood, fear, or pride,
Their ostrich-heads in self-illusion hide:
Thus England, hot from Denmark’s smoking
. meads,
Turns up her eyes at Gallia's guilty deeds;
“ Whom he called together, with the workmen of like
occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that bythis craft we
have our wealth:
“ So that not only this our craft is likely to be set at
nought, but also that the temple of the great goddess
Diana should be despised,” &c. 8cc.
Digitized by VjOCK^lC
Thus, selfish still, the same dishonouring chain
She binds in Ireland; she'would break iri Spain
While prais’d at distance, but at hoime fdrbid,
Rebels in Cork are patriots at Madrid! *	·’ ' r
Oh! trust me, Self can cloud the brightest cause,
Or gild the worst—and then, fof nations’ laws!—
Go, good civilian, shut thy useless book,
In force alone for laws of nations look.
Let shipless Danee and whining Yankees dwell
On naval rights, with Grotius and Vattel,
While C—bb—t’s* pirate code alone appears
Sound moral sense to England and Algiers!
*■ With most of this writer’s latter politics I confess I
feel a most hearty concurrence, and perhaps, if I were an
Englishman, my pride might lead me to acquiesce ia that
system of lawless, unlimited sovereignty, which he claim*
so boldly for his country at sea; but, viewing the question
somewhat more disinterestedly, and as a friend to the cotii-
mon rights of mankind, 1 cannot help tlfinkijig- that the
doctrines, which he maintained upon the Copenhagen ejtpp*
dition'
Woe to the Sceptic, in these party days,
Who burns on neither shrine the balm of
praise!
For him no pension pours its annual fruits,
No fertile sinecure spontaneous shoots;
Not his the meed, that crown'd Don H—kh—m*s
rhyme,
Nor sees he e’er, in dreams of future time»
Those shadowy forms of sleek reversions rise,
So dear to Scotchmen’s second-sighted eyes!
Yet who, that looks to time’s accusing leaf,
Where Whig and Tory, thief oppos’d to thief,
On either eide in lofty shame are seen*,
While Freedom’s form hangs crucified between—
dition and die differences with America, would establish *
species of maritime tyranny, as discreditable to the charac-
ter of England, as it would be galling and unjust to the
other nations of die world.	
*	This I have borrowed from Ralph—Use and Abuse
of Parliaments, p. 164«
Who, B—rd—tt, who such rival rogues can see,
But flies from both to honesty and thee?
Ip, giddy -with the world’s bewildering maze*,
Hopeless of finding, through its weedy ways,
One flower of truth, the busy crowd we shun,
And to the shades of tranquil learning ran,
How many a doubt pursues-f*! how oft we sigh,
When histories charm, to think that histories lie!
*	The agitation of the ship » one of the chief difficul-
ties whjch impede the discovery of the longitude at sea;
and the tumult and huny of life are equally unfavourable
to that calm level of mind which is necessary to u inquirer
after truth. In the mean time, our modest Sceptic, in die
absence of truth, contents himself with probabilities, re-
sembling in (his respect thou* suitors of Penelope, who,
when they found that they could not possess the mistress
herself, very wisely resolved to put up with her muds;
η Π«μΛ0π· ψληηβζu» jm Xwptw, τανη* yuytvm dipMMNUf·
Plutarch Hipi IbJle Ayt/γιχ.
t See a curious work, entitled “ Reflections upon Learn·
iftg,” written on the plan of Agrippa’* " De Vanitate Sew
«frtjarrnn,” hut much toor* honestly and skilfully executed.
That aU are. graye, romances, at the.best,
And M—sgr—ve’s* but more clumsy than the
rest!
By Tory Hume’s seductive page , beguil’d,
We fancy Charles was just and Strafford mild’fr;
And Foxrhimself, with party pencil, draws
Monmouth a hero, “ for the good old caused!”
#	This liistori^B Qf the Irish rebellions has outrun even his
predecessor in the same task, Sir John Temple, for whose
character with respect to veracity the reader may consult
Carte’* Collection of Ormond’s Original Papers, p. 207.
See also Dr. Nalson’s account of him, in the Introduction
to the second volume of his Historic. Collect.
+ He defendsStrafford’s conduct a* “ innocent and even
^dable.” In the same spirit, * speaking of the arbitrary
sentences of the Star Chamber, he says—The severity of
the Star Chamber, which was generally ascribed to Laud’s
passionate disposition, was perhaps/ in itself, somewhat
blameable.” See Tower» upon Htime.	*
J That flexibility of temper andopinion, which the habits
of scepticism are so calculated to produce, are thus pleaded
for by Mr. Fox, in the very sketch of Monmouth to which
X allude ; and this part of the picture the historian, may be
thought
Then, rights are wrongs, and victories are defeats,
As French or English pride the tale repeats;
And, when they tell Corunna’s stoiy o’er,
They’ll disagree in all, but honouring Moore!
thought to have drawn from himself. “ One of the most
conspicuous features in hie character seems to have been a
remarkable, and, as some think, a culpable degree of
flexibility. That such a disposition is preferable to its
opposite extreme will be admitted by all, who think that
modesty, even in excess, is more nearly allied to wisdom
than conceit and self-sufficiency. He, who has attentively
considered the political, or indeed the general concerns of
life, may possibly go still farther, aud may rank a willing^
ness to be convinced, or, in some cases, even without
conviction, to concede our own opinion to that of other
men, among the principal ingredients in the composition
of practical wisdom.”—The Sceptic’s readiness of con-
cession, however, arises more from uncertainty than con-
viction, more from a suspicion that his own opinion may
be wrong, than from any persuasion that the opinion of his
adversary is right. “ It may be so,” was the courteous and
sceptical formula, with which the Dutch were accustomed
to reply to the statements of ambassadors· See Lloyd’s
Styte Worthies, art. Sir Thomas Wiat.
.	To
Nay, fbture pens, to flatter future courts,
May eke perhaps the Park-guns’ gay reports,
To prove that England triumph'd on the morn,
Which found her Junot’s jest and Europe’s scorn I
In Science too—how many a system, rais’d
Like Neva’s icy domes, awhile hath blaz’d '
With lights of fancy aind with forms of pride,
Then, melting, mingled with the oblivious tide!
Nov; Earth usurps the centre of the sky,
Now Newton puts the paltry planet by;
Now whims revive beneath Descartes’s* pen.
Which new, assail’d by Locke’s, expire agaip;
To the historical fragment of Mr.,Fox, we may apply
what Pliny says of the last, unfinished works of cele-
brated artists—“ In lenocinio commendationis dolor est
manus, cum id ageret, extinct».” Lib. xxxv. cap, 8,
*	Descartes, who is considered as the parent of modem
scepticism, says, that there is nothing in the whole range of
philosophy vhich does not admit of two opposite.opinion^
and which is not involved in doubt and uncertainty. M In
Philosophia nihil adhuc repetiri, de quo non in ntramque
partem
And when, perhaps, in pride of chetnic powers,
We think the keys of nature’s kingdom ours,
Some Davy’s magic touch the dream unsettles,
And turns at once our alkalis to metals 1
Of, should we roam, in metaphysic maze,
Through fair-built theories of former days,
Some Dr—ram—d* from the north, more ably
skill’d,
like other Goths, to ruin than to build,
Tramples triumphant through oar fanes o’er-
thrown,
Nor leaves one grace, one glory of his own !
partem disputatur, hoc est, quod boo ait incertum et du-
bium.”—Gassendi is another of our modem Sceptics, and
Wedderkopff, in his Dissertation “ De Scepticismo pro-
fano et sacro” (Argeutorat. 1066), has denounced Eras-
mus as a follower of Pynho, for his opinions upon the
Trinity, and some other subjects. To these if we add the
names of Bayle, Mallebranche, Dryden, Locke, &c. 8cc.
I think there is no one who need be ashamed of doubting
in such company.
.	*	See	this gentleman’s Academic Questions.
Oh Learning! Learning! .whatsoe’er thy boast,
Unletter’d minds have taught and charm'd us
most:	
The rude, unread Columbus was our guide
To worlds, which leam’d Lactantius had deny’d,
And one wild Shakespeare, following Nature’s
lights,
Is worth whole planets, fill’d with Stagirites!
. Ser grave Theology, when once she strays
From Revelation’s path, what tricks she plays!
How many various heavens hath Fancy’s wing
Explor’d or touch’d, from Papias* down to
King-f-!
*	Papias lived about the time of the Apostles, and is
supposed to have given birth to the heresy of the Chi-
liastfe, whose heaven was by no means of a spiritual na-
ture, but rather an anticipation of the Prophet of Ilera’s
elysiutn. See Eusebius Hist. £cclesiast. Jib. iii. cap. 33,
&	Hieronym. de Scriptor. Ecclesiast.—though, from all
that I can find in these authors concerning . Papias, it
„ seems
And hell itself, In India nought but smoke*,
In Spain’s a furnace, and in France—a joke.
Hail, modest ignorance! thou goal and prize,
Thou last, best knowledge of the humbly wise!
Hail, sceptic ease t when error’s waves ar& past,
How sweet to reach thy tranquil port J at last,
And, gently rock’d in undulating doubt,
Smile at the sturdy winds, which war without!

seems hardly fair to impute to him those gross imagina-
tions, in which the believers of the sensual millennium in-
dulged.
+ King, in his Morsels of Criticism, vol. i· supposes
the sun to be the receptacle of blessed spirits. .
#	The Indians call hell “ the House of Smoke.” See
Picart upon the Religion of the Banians. . The reader
who is curious about infernal matters, may be edified by
consulting Rusca de Inferno, particularly lib. ii. cap. 7, 8,
where he will find the precise sort of fire ascertained, in
which wicked spirits are to be burned hereafter.
\ “ Chere Sceptique, douce p&ture de mon ame, et
Tunique port de salut ά un esprit qui aime le repos!” Le
Mothe le Vayer.	*
There gentle Charity, who knows how frail
The bark of Virtue, even in summer’s gale,
Bits by the nightly fire, whose beacon glows
For all who wander,'whether friends or foes!
There Faith retires, and keeps her white sail furl’dj
Till call’d to spread it for a purer world;	'
While Patience lingers o’er the weedy shore,
And, mutely waiting till the storm be o’er,
Turns to young Hope, who still directs his eye .
To some blue spot, just breaking in the sky!
These are the mild, the blest associates given
To him who doubts, and trusts in nought but
Heaven !
THE END,