FABLES FOR THE HOLY ALLIANCE.


    _tu Regibus alas eripe_
    VERGIL, _Georg. lib_. iv.


    --Clip the wings Of these high-flying arbitrary Kings.
    DRYDEN'S _Translation_.




DEDICATION.

TO LORD BYRON.

Dear Lord Byron,--Though this Volume should possess no other merit in your
eyes, than that of reminding you of the short time we passed together at
Venice, when some of the trifles which it contains were written, you will,
I am sure, receive the dedication of it with pleasure, and believe that I
am,

My dear Lord,

Ever faithfully yours,

T. B.




PREFACE.


Though it was the wish of the Members of the Poco-curante Society (who
have lately done me the honor of electing me their Secretary) that I
should prefix my name to the following Miscellany, it is but fair to them
and to myself to state, that, except in the "painful pre-eminence" of
being employed to transcribe their lucubrations, my claim to such a
distinction in the title-page is not greater than that of any other
gentleman, who has contributed his share to the contents of the volume.

I had originally intended to take this opportunity of giving some account
of the origin and objects of our Institution, the names and characters of
the different members, etc.--but as I am at present preparing for the
press the First Volume of the "Transactions of the Pococurante Society," I
shall reserve for that occasion all further details upon the subject, and
content myself here with referring, for a general insight into our tenets,
to a Song which will be found at the end of this work and which is sung to
us on the first day of every month, by one of our oldest members, to the
tune of (as far as I can recollect, being no musician,) either "Nancy
Dawson" or "He stole away the Bacon."

It may be as well also to state for the information of those critics who
attack with the hope of being answered, and of being thereby brought into
notice, that it is the rule of this Society to return no other answer to
such assailants, than is contained in the three words "_non curat
Hippoclides_" (meaning, in English, "Hippoclides does not care a fig,")
which were spoken two thousand years ago by the first founder of Poco-
curantism, and have ever since been adopted as the leading _dictum_ of the
sect.

THOMAS BROWN.






FABLES FOR THE HOLY ALLIANCE.




FABLE I.

THE DISSOLUTION OF THE HOLY ALLIANCE.

A DREAM.


I've had a dream that bodes no good
Unto the Holy Brotherhood.
I may be wrong, but I confess--
  As far as it is right or lawful
For one, no conjurer, to guess--
  It seems to me extremely awful.

Methought, upon the Neva's flood
A beautiful Ice Palace stood,
A dome of frost-work, on the plan
Of that once built by Empress Anne,[1]
Which shone by moonlight--as the tale is--
Like an Aurora Borealis.

In this said Palace, furnisht all
  And lighted as the best on land are,
I dreamt there was a splendid Ball,
  Given by the Emperor Alexander,
To entertain with all due zeal,
  Those holy gentlemen, who've shown a
Regard so kind for Europe's weal,
  At Troppau, Laybach and Verona.

The thought was happy--and designed
To hint how thus the human Mind
May, like the stream imprisoned there,
Be checkt and chilled, till it can bear
The heaviest Kings, that ode or sonnet
E'er yet be-praised, to dance upon it.
And all were pleased and cold and stately,
  Shivering in grand illumination--
Admired the superstructure greatly,
  Nor gave one thought to the foundation.
Much too the Tsar himself exulted,
  To all plebeian fears a stranger,
For, Madame Krudener, when consulted,
  Had pledged her word there was no danger
So, on he capered, fearless quite,
  Thinking himself extremely clever,
And waltzed away with all his might,
  As if the Frost would last forever.

Just fancy how a bard like me,
  Who reverence monarchs, must have trembled
To see that goodly company,
  At such a ticklish sport assembled.

Nor were the fears, that thus astounded
My loyal soul, at all unfounded--
For, lo! ere long, those walls so massy
  Were seized with an ill-omened dripping,
And o'er the floors, now growing glassy,
  Their Holinesses took to slipping.
The Tsar, half thro' a Polonaise,
  Could scarce get on for downright stumbling;
And Prussia, tho' to slippery ways
  Well used, was cursedly near tumbling.

Yet still 'twas, _who_ could stamp the floor most,
Russia and Austria 'mong the foremost.--
And now, to an Italian air,
  This precious brace would, hand in hand, go;
Now--while old Louis, from his chair,
Intreated them his toes to spare--
  Called loudly out for a Fandango.

And a Fandango, 'faith, they had,
At which they all set to, like mad!
Never were Kings (tho' small the expense is
Of wit among their Excellencies)
So out of all their princely senses,
But ah! that dance--that Spanish dance--
  Scarce was the luckless strain begun,
When, glaring red, as 'twere a glance
  Shot from an angry Southern sun,
A light thro' all the chambers flamed,
  Astonishing old Father Frost,
Who, bursting into tears, exclaimed,
  "A thaw, by Jove--we're lost, we're lost!
"Run, France--a second _Water_loo
"Is come to drown you-_sauve qui peut_!"

Why, why will monarchs caper so
  In palaces without foundations?--
Instantly all was in a flow,
  Crowns, fiddles, sceptres, decorations--
Those Royal Arms, that lookt so nice,
Cut out in the resplendent ice--
Those Eagles, handsomely provided
  With double heads for double dealings--
How fast the globes and sceptres glided
  Out of their claws on all the ceilings!
Proud Prussia's double bird of prey
Tame as a spatch cock, slunk away;
While--just like France herself, when she
  Proclaims how great her naval skill is--
Poor Louis's drowning fleurs-de-lys
  Imagined themselves _water_-lilies.

And not alone rooms, ceilings, shelves,
  But--still more fatal execution--
The Great Legitimates themselves
  Seemed in a state of dissolution.
The indignant Tsar--when just about
  To issue a sublime Ukase,
"Whereas all light must be kept out"--
  Dissolved to nothing in its blaze.
Next Prussia took his turn to melt,
And, while his lips illustrious felt
The influence of this southern air,
  Some word, like "Constitution"--long
Congealed in frosty silence there--
  Came slowly thawing from his tongue.
While Louis, lapsing by degrees,
  And sighing out a faint adieu
To truffles, salmis, toasted cheese
  And smoking _fondus_, quickly grew,
  Himself, into a _fondu_ too;--
Or like that goodly King they make
Of sugar for a Twelfth-night cake,
When, in some urchin's mouth, alas!
It melts into a shapeless mass!

In short, I scarce could count a minute,
Ere the bright dome and all within it,
Kings, Fiddlers, Emperors, all were gone--
  And nothing now was seen or heard
But the bright river, rushing on,
  Happy as an enfranchised bird,
And prouder of that natural ray,
Shining along its chainless way--
More proudly happy thus to glide
  In simple grandeur to the sea,
Than when, in sparkling fetters tied,
'Twas deckt with all that kingly pride
  Could bring to light its slavery!

Such is my dream--and, I confess,
I tremble at its awfulness.
That Spanish Dance--that southern beam--
But I say nothing--there's my dream--
And Madame Krüdener, the she-prophet,
May make just what she pleases of it.


[1] "It is well-known that the Empress Anne built a palace of ice on the
Neva, in 1740, which was fifty-two feet in length, and when illuminated
had a surprising effect."--PINKERTON.






FABLE II.

THE LOOKING-GLASSES.


PROEM.

Where Kings have been by mob-elections
  Raised to the throne, 'tis strange to see
What different and what odd perfections
  Men have required in Royalty.
Some, liking monarchs large and plumpy,
  Have chosen their Sovereigns by the weight;--
Some wisht them tall, some thought your Dumpy,
  Dutch-built, the true Legitimate.[1]
The Easterns in a Prince, 'tis said,
Prefer what's called a jolterhead:[2]
The Egyptians weren't at all partic'lar,
  So that their Kings had _not_ red hair--
_This_ fault not even the greatest stickler
  For the blood-royal well could bear.

A thousand more such illustrations
Might be adduced from various nations.
But, 'mong the many tales they tell us,
  Touching the acquired or natural right
Which some men have to rule their fellows,
  There's one which I shall here recite:--

FABLE.

There was a land--to _name_ the place
  Is neither now my wish nor duty--
Where reigned a certain Royal race,
  By right of their superior beauty.

What was the cut legitimate
  Of these great persons' chins and noses,
By right of which they ruled the state,
  No history I have seen discloses.

But so it was--a settled case--
  Some Act of Parliament, past snugly,
Had voted _them_ a beauteous race,
  And all their faithful subjects ugly.

As rank indeed stood high or low,
  Some change it made in visual organs;
Your Peers were decent--Knights, so so--
  But all your _common_ people, gorgons!

Of course, if any knave but hinted
  That the King's nose was turned awry,
Or that the Queen (God bless her!) squinted--
  The judges doomed that knave to die.

But rarely things like this occurred,
  The people to their King were duteous,
And took it, on his Royal word,
  That they were frights and He was beauteous.

The cause whereof, among all classes,
  Was simply this--these island elves
Had never yet seen looking-glasses,
  And therefore did not _know themselves_.

Sometimes indeed their neighbors' faces
  Might strike them as more full of reason,
More fresh than those in certain places--
  But, Lord, the very thought was treason!

Besides, howe'er we love our neighbor,
  And take his face's part, 'tis known
We ne'er so much in earnest labor,
  As when the face attackt's our own.

So on they went--the crowd believing--
  (As crowds well governed always do)
Their rulers, too, themselves deceiving--
  So old the joke, they thought 'twas true.

But jokes, we know, if they too far go,
  Must have an end--and so, one day,
Upon that coast there was a cargo
  Of looking-glasses cast away.

'Twas said, some Radicals, somewhere,
  Had laid their wicked heads together,
And forced that ship to founder there,--
  While some believe it was the weather.

However this might be, the freight
  Was landed without fees or duties;
And from that hour historians date
  The downfall of the Race of Beauties.

The looking-glasses got about,
  And grew so common thro' the land,
That scarce a tinker could walk out,
  Without a mirror in his hand.

Comparing faces, morning, noon,
  And night, their constant occupation--
By dint of looking-glasses, soon,
  They grew a most reflecting nation.

In vain the Court, aware of errors
  In all the old, establisht mazards,
Prohibited the use of mirrors
  And tried to break them at all hazards:--

In vain--their laws might just as well
  Have been waste paper on the shelves;
That fatal freight had broke the spell;
  People had lookt--and knew themselves.

If chance a Duke, of birth sublime,
  Presumed upon his ancient face,
(Some calf-head, ugly from all time,)
  They popt a mirror to his Grace;--

Just hinting, by that gentle sign,
  How little Nature holds it true,
That what is called an ancient line,
  Must be the line of Beauty too.

From Dukes' they past to regal phizzes,
  Compared them proudly with their own,
And cried. "How _could_ such monstrous quizzes
  "In Beauty's name usurp the throne!"--

They then wrote essays, pamphlets, books,
  Upon Cosmetical Oeconomy,
Which made the King try various looks,
  But none improved his physiognomy.

And satires at the Court were levelled,
  And small lampoons, so full of slynesses,
That soon, in short, they quite bedeviled
  Their Majesties and Royal Highnesses.

At length--but here I drop the veil,
  To spare some royal folks' sensations;--
Besides, what followed is the tale
  Of all such late-enlightened nations;

Of all to whom old Time discloses
  A truth they should have sooner known--
That kings have neither rights nor noses
  A whit diviner than their own.


[1] The Goths had a law to choose always a short, thick man for their
King.--Munster, "_Cosmog." lib_. iii. p. 164.

[2] "In a Prince a jolter-head is invaluable."--_Oriental Field Sports_.






FABLE III.

THE TORCH OF LIBERTY.


I saw it all in Fancy's glass--
  Herself, the fair, the wild magician,
Who bade this splendid day-dream pass,
  And named each gliding apparition.

'Twas like a torch-race--such as they
  Of Greece performed, in ages gone,
When the fleet youths, in long array,
  Past the bright torch triumphant on.

I saw the expectant nations stand,
  To catch the coming flame in turn;--
I saw, from ready hand to hand,
  The clear tho' struggling glory burn.

And oh! their joy, as it came near,
  'Twas in itself a joy to see;--
While Fancy whispered in my ear.
  "That torch they pass is Liberty!"

And each, as she received the flame,
  Lighted her altar with its ray;
Then, smiling, to the next who came,
  Speeded it on its sparkling way.

From ALBION first, whose ancient shrine
Was furnisht with the fire already,
COLUMBIA caught the boon divine,
  And lit a flame, like ALBION'S, steady.

The splendid gift then GALLIA took,
  And, like a wild Bacchante, raising
The brand aloft, its sparkles shook,
  As she would set the world _a-blazing_!

Thus kindling wild, so fierce and high
  Her altar blazed into the air,
That ALBION, to that fire too nigh,
  Shrunk back and shuddered at its glare!

Next, SPAIN, so new was light to her,
  Leapt at the torch--but, ere the spark
That fell upon her shrine could stir,
  'Twas quenched--and all again was dark.

Yet, no--_not_ quenched--a treasure worth
  So much to mortals rarely dies:
Again her living light lookt forth,
  And shone, a beacon, in all eyes.

Who next received the flame? alas!
  Unworthy NAPLES--shame of shames,
That ever thro' such hands should pass
  That brightest of all earthly flames!

Scarce had her fingers touched the torch.
  When, frighted by the sparks it shed,
Nor waiting even to feel the scorch,
  She dropt it to the earth--and fled.

And fallen it might have long remained;
  But GREECE, who saw her moment now,
Caught up the prize, tho' prostrate, stained,
  And waved it round her beauteous brow.

And Fancy bade me mark where, o'er
  Her altar, as its flame ascended,
Fair, laurelled spirits seemed to soar,
  Who thus in song their voices blended:--

"Shine, shine for ever, glorious Flame,
  "Divinest gift of Gods to men!
"From GREECE thy earliest splendor came,
  "To GREECE thy ray returns again.

"Take, Freedom, take thy radiant round,
  "When _dimmed_, revive, when lost, return,
"Till not a shrine thro' earth be found,
  "On which thy glories shall not burn."






FABLE IV.

THE FLY AND THE BULLOCK.


PROEM.

Of all that, to the sage's survey,
This world presents of topsy-turvy,
There's naught so much disturbs one's patience,
As little minds in lofty stations.
'Tis like that sort of painful wonder.
Which slender columns, laboring under
  Enormous arches, give beholders;--
Or those poor Caryatides,
Condemned to smile and stand at ease,
  With a whole house upon their shoulders.

If as in some few royal cases,
Small minds are _born_ into such places--
If they are there by Right Divine
  Or any such sufficient reason,
Why--Heaven forbid we should repine!--
  To wish it otherwise were treason;
Nay, even to see it in a vision,
Would be what lawyers call _misprision_.

SIR ROBERT FILMER saith--and he,
  Of course, knew all about the matter--
"Both men and beasts love Monarchy;"
  Which proves how rational the latter.
SIDNEY, we know, or wrong or right.
Entirely differed from the Knight:
Nay, hints a King may lose his head.
  By slipping awkwardly his bridle:--
But this is treasonous, ill-bred,
And (now-a-days, when Kings are led
  In patent snaffles) downright idle.

No, no--it isn’t right-line Kings,
(Those sovereign lords in leading strings
Who, from their birth, are Faith-Defenders,)
That move my wrath--'tis your pretenders,
Your mushroom rulers, sons of earth,
Who--not, like t'others, bores by birth,
Establisht _gratiâ Dei_ blockheads,
Born with three kingdoms in their pockets--
Yet, with a brass that nothing stops,
  Push up into the loftiest stations,
And, tho' too dull to manage shops,
  Presume, the dolts, to manage nations!

This class it is, that moves my gall,
And stirs up bile, and spleen and all.
While other senseless things appear
To know the limits of their sphere--
While not a cow on earth romances
So much as to conceit she dances--
While the most jumping frog we know of,
Would scarce at Astley's hope to show off--
Your ***s, your ***s dare,
  Untrained as are their minds, to set them
To _any_ business, _any_ where,
At _any_ time that fools will let them.

But leave we here these upstart things--
My business is just now with Kings;
To whom and to their right-line glory,
I dedicate the following story.

FABLE

The wise men of Egypt were secret as dummies;
  And even when they most condescended to teach,
They packt up their meaning, as they did their mummies,
  In so many wrappers, 'twas out of one's reach.

They were also, good people, much given to Kings--
  Fond of craft and of crocodiles, monkeys and mystery;
But blue-bottle flies were their best beloved things--
  As will partly appear in this very short history.

A Scythian philosopher (nephew, they say,
  To that other great traveller, young Anacharsis,)
Stept into a temple at Memphis one day,
To have a short peep at their mystical farces.

He saw a brisk blue-bottle Fly on an altar,
  Made much of, and worshipt, as something divine;
While a large, handsome Bullock, led there in a halter,
  Before it lay stabbed at the foot of the shrine.

Surprised at such doings, he whispered his teacher--
  "If 'tisn't impertinent, may I ask why
"Should a Bullock, that useful and powerful creature,
  "Be thus offered up to a bluebottle Fly?"

"No wonder"--said t'other--"you stare at the sight,
  "But we as a Symbol of Monarchy view it--
"That Fly on the shrine is Legitimate Right,
  "And that Bullock, the People that's sacrificed to it."






FABLE V.

CHURCH AND STATE.


PROEM


    "The moment any religion becomes national, or established, its purity
    must certainly be lost, because it is then impossible to keep it
    unconnected with men's interests; and, if connected, it must
    inevitably be perverted by them."
    --SOAME JENYNS


Thus did SOAME JENYNS--tho' a Tory,
  A Lord of Trade and the Plantations;
Feel how Religion's simple glory
  Is stained by State associations.

When CATHARINE, ere she crusht the Poles,
  Appealed to the benign Divinity;
Then cut them up in protocols,
Made fractions of their very souls--
  All in the name of the blest Trinity;
Or when her grandson, ALEXANDER,
That mighty Northern salamander,[1]
Whose icy touch, felt all about,
Puts every fire of Freedom out--
When he, too, winds up his Ukases
With God and the Panagia's praises--
When he, of royal Saints the type,
  In holy water dips the sponge,
With which, at one imperial wipe,
  He would all human rights expunge;
When LOUIS (whom as King, and eater,
Some name _Dix-huit_, and some _Deshuitres_.)
Calls down "St. Louis's God" to witness
The right, humanity, and fitness
Of sending eighty thousand Solons,
  Sages with muskets and laced coats,
To cram instruction, _nolens volens_,
  Down the poor struggling Spaniards' throats--
I can’t help thinking, (tho' to Kings
   I must, of course, like other men, bow,)
That when a Christian monarch brings
Religion's name to gloss these things--
   Such blasphemy out-Benbows Benbow![2]

   Or--not so far for facts to roam,
Having a few much nearer home-
When we see Churchmen, who, if askt,
"Must Ireland's slaves be tithed, and taskt,
"And driven, like Negroes or Croats,
   "That _you_ may roll in wealth and bliss?"
Look from beneath their shovel hats
   With all due pomp and answer "Yes!"
But then, if questioned, "Shall the brand
"Intolerance flings throughout that land,--
"Shall the fierce strife now taught to grow
'Betwixt her palaces and hovels,
"Be ever quenched?"--from the same shovels
Look grandly forth and answer "No."--
Alas, alas! have _these_ a claim
To merciful Religion's name?
If more you seek, go see a bevy
Of bowing parsons at a levee--
(Choosing your time, when straw's before
Some apoplectic bishop's door,)
Then if thou canst with life escape
That rush of lawn, that press of crape,
Just watch their reverences and graces,
   As on each smirking suitor frisks,
And say, if those round shining faces
   To heaven or earth most turn their disks?
This, this it is--Religion, made,
Twixt Church and State, a truck, a trade--
This most ill-matched, unholy _Co_.,
From whence the ills we witness flow;
The war of many creeds with one--
The extremes of _too_ much faith and none--
Till, betwixt ancient trash and new,
'Twixt Cant and Blasphemy--the two
Rank ills with which this age is curst--
We can no more tell which is worst,
Than erst could Egypt, when so rich
In various plagues, determine which
She thought most pestilent and vile,
Her frogs, like Benbow and Carlisle,
Croaking their native mud-notes loud,
Or her fat locusts, like a cloud
Of pluralists, obesely lowering,
At once benighting and devouring!--

This--this it is--and here I pray
   Those sapient wits of the Reviews.
Who make us poor, dull authors say,
   Not what we mean, but what they choose;
Who to our most abundant shares
Of nonsense add still more of theirs,
And are to poets just such evils
   As caterpillars find those flies,[3]
Which, not content to sting like devils,
   Lay eggs upon their backs like wise--
To guard against such foul deposits
  Of other's meaning in my rhymes,
(A thing more needful here because it's
  A subject, ticklish in these times)--
I, here, to all such wits make known,
  Monthly and Weekly, Whig and Tory,
'Tis _this_ Religion--this alone--
  I aim at in the following story:--

FABLE.

When Royalty was young and bold,
  Ere, touched by Time, he had become--
If 'tisn't civil to say _old_,
  At least, a _ci-devant jeune homme_;

One evening, on some wild pursuit
  Driving along, he chanced to see
Religion, passing by on foot,
  And took him in his vis-à-vis.

This said Religion was a Friar,
  The humblest and the best of men,
Who ne'er had notion or desire
  Of riding in a coach till then.

"I say"--quoth Royalty, who rather
  Enjoyed a masquerading joke--
"I say, suppose, my good old father,
  "You lend me for a while your cloak."

The Friar consented--little knew
  What tricks the youth had in his head;
Besides, was rather tempted too
  By a laced coat he got instead.

Away ran Royalty, slap-dash,
  Scampering like mad about the town;
Broke windows, shivered lamps to smash,
  And knockt whole scores of watchmen down.

While naught could they, whose heads were broke,
  Learn of the "why" or the "wherefore,"
Except that 'twas Religion's cloak
  The gentleman, who crackt them, wore,

Meanwhile, the Friar, whose head was turned
  By the laced coat, grew frisky too;
Lookt big--his former habits spurned--
  And stormed about, as great men do:

Dealt much in pompous oaths and curses--
  Said "Damn you" often, or as bad--
Laid claim to other people's purses--
  In short, grew either knaves or mad.

As work like this was unbefitting,
  And flesh and blood no longer bore it,
The Court of Common Sense, then sitting,
  Summoned the culprits both before it.

Where, after hours in wrangling spent
  (As Courts must wrangle to decide well).
Religion to St. Luke's was sent,
  And Royalty packt off to Bridewell.

With this proviso--should they be
  Restored, in due time, to their senses,
They both must give security,
  In future, against such offences--
Religion ne'er to _lend his cloak_,
  Seeing what dreadful work it leads to;
And Royalty to crack his joke,--
  But _not_ to crack poor people's heads too.


[1] The salamander is supposed to have the power of extinguishing fire by
its natural coldness and moisture.

[2] A well-known publisher of irreligious books.

[3] "The greatest number of the ichneumon tribe are seen settling upon the
back of the caterpillar, and darting at different intervals their stings
into its body--at every dart they deposit an egg"--GOLDSMITH.






FABLE VI.

THE LITTLE GRAND LAMA.


PROEM.

Novella, a young Bolognese,
  The daughter of a learned Law Doctor,[1]
Who had with all the subtleties
  Of old and modern jurists stockt her,
Was so exceeding fair, 'tis said,
  And over hearts held such dominion,
That when her father, sick in bed,
Or busy, sent her, in his stead,
  To lecture on the Code Justinian,
She had a curtain drawn before her,
  Lest, if her charms were seen, the students
Should let their young eyes wander o'er her,
  And quite forget their jurisprudence.
Just so it is with Truth, when _seen_,
  Too dazzling far,--'tis from behind
A light, thin allegoric screen,
  She thus can safest leach mankind.

FABLE.

In Thibet once there reigned, we're told,
A little Lama, one year old--
Raised to the throne, that realm to bless,
Just when his little Holiness
Had cut--as near as can be reckoned--
Some say his _first_ tooth, some his _second_.
Chronologers and Nurses vary,
Which proves historians should be wary.
We only know the important truth,
His Majesty _had_ cut a tooth.
And much his subjects were enchanted,--
  As well all Lamas' subjects _may_ be,
And would have given their heads, if wanted,
  To make tee-totums for the baby.
Throned as he was by Right Divine--
  (What Lawyers call _Jure Divino_,
Meaning a right to yours and mine
  And everybody's goods and rhino.)
Of course, his faithful subjects' purses
  Were ready with their aids and succors;
Nothing was seen but pensioned Nurses;
  And the land groaned with bibs and tuckers.

Oh! had there been a Hume or Bennet,
Then sitting in the Thibet Senate,
Ye Gods! what room for long debates
Upon the Nursery Estimates!
What cutting down of swaddling-clothes
  And pinafores, in nightly battles!
What calls for papers to expose
  The waste of sugar-plums and rattles!
But no--if Thibet _had_ M.P.s,
They were far better bred than these;
Nor gave the slightest opposition,
During the Monarch's whole dentition.

But short this calm;--for, just when he,
Had reached the alarming age of three,
When Royal natures and no doubt
Those of _all_ noble beasts break out--
The Lama, who till then was quiet,
Showed symptoms of a taste for riot;
And, ripe for mischief, early, late,
Without regard for Church or State,
Made free with whosoe'er came nigh;
  Tweakt the Lord Chancellor by the nose,
Turned all the Judges' wigs awry,
  And trod on the old Generals' toes;
Pelted the Bishops with hot buns,
  Rode cock-horse on the City maces,
And shot from little devilish guns,
  Hard peas into the subjects' faces.
In short, such wicked pranks he played,
  And' grew so mischievous, God bless him!
That his Chief Nurse--with even the aid
Of an Archbishop--was afraid.
  When in these moods, to comb or dress him.
Nay, even the persons most inclined
  Thro' thick and thin, for Kings to stickle,
Thought him (if they'd but speak their mind;
  Which they did _not_) an odious pickle.

At length some patriot lords--a breed
  Of animals they've got in Thibet,
Extremely rare and fit indeed
  For folks like Pidcock, to exhibit--
Some patriot lords, who saw the length
To which things went, combined their strength,
And penned a manly, plain and free,
Remonstrance to the Nursery;
Protesting warmly that they yielded
To none that ever went before 'em,
In loyalty to him who wielded
  The hereditary pap-spoon o'er 'em;
That, as for treason, 'twas a thing
  That made them almost sick to think of--
That they and theirs stood by the King,
  Throughout his measles and his chincough,
When others, thinking him consumptive,
Had ratted to the Heir Presumptive!--
But, still--tho' much admiring Kings
(And chiefly those in leading-strings),
They saw, with shame and grief of soul,
  There was no longer now the wise
And constitutional control
  Of _birch_ before their ruler's eyes;
But that of late such pranks and tricks
  And freaks occurred the whole day long,
As all but men with bishoprics
  Allowed, in even a King, were wrong.
Wherefore it was they humbly prayed
  That Honorable Nursery,
That such reforms be henceforth made,
  As all good men desired to see;--
In other words (lest they might seem
Too tedious), as the gentlest scheme
For putting all such pranks to rest,
  And in its bud the mischief nipping--
They ventured humbly to suggest
  His Majesty should have a whipping!

When this was read, no Congreve rocket,
  Discharged into the Gallic trenches
E'er equalled the tremendous shock it
  Produced upon the Nursery benches.
The Bishops, who of course had votes,
By right of age and petticoats,
Were first and foremost in the fuss--
  "What, whip a Lama! suffer birch
"To touch his sacred--infamous!
"Deistical!--assailing thus
  "The fundamentals of the Church!--
"No--no--such patriot plans as these,
"(So help them Heaven--and their Sees!)
"They held to be rank blasphemies."

The alarm thus given, by these and other
  Grave ladies of the Nursery side,
Spread thro' the land, till, such a pother,
  Such party squabbles, far and wide,
Never in history's page had been
Recorded, as were then between
The Whippers and Non-whippers seen.
Till, things arriving at a state,
  Which gave some fears of revolution,
The patriot lords' advice, tho' late,
  Was put at last in execution.
The Parliament of Thibet met--
  The little Lama, called before it,
Did, then and there, his whipping get,
And (as the _Nursery Gazette_
  Assures us) like a hero bore it.

And tho', 'mong Thibet Tories, some
Lament that Royal Martyrdom
(Please to observe, the letter D
In this last word's pronounced like B),
Yet to the example of that Prince
  So much is Thibet's land a debtor,
That her long line of Lamas, since,
  Have all behaved themselves _much_ better.


[1] Andreas.






FABLE VII.

THE EXTINGUISHERS.


PROEM.

Tho' soldiers are the true supports,
The natural allies of Courts,
Woe to the Monarch, who depends
Too _much_ on his red-coated friends;
For even soldiers sometimes _think_--
  Nay, Colonels have been known to _reason_,--

And reasoners, whether clad in pink
Or red or blue, are on the brink
  (Nine cases out of ten) of treason

Not many soldiers, I believe, are
  As fond of liberty as Mina;
Else--woe to Kings! when Freedom's fever
  Once turns into a _Scarletina_!
For then--but hold--'tis best to veil
My meaning in the following tale:--

FABLE.

A Lord of Persia, rich and great,
Just come into a large estate,
Was shockt to find he had, for neighbors,
Close to his gate, some rascal Ghebers,
Whose fires, beneath his very nose,
In heretic combustion rose.
But Lords of Persia can, no doubt,
  Do what they will--so, one fine morning,
He turned the rascal Ghebers out,
  First giving a few kicks for warning.
Then, thanking Heaven most piously,
  He knockt their Temple to the ground,
Blessing himself for joy to see
  Such Pagan ruins strewed around.
But much it vext my Lord to find,
  That, while all else obeyed his will,
The Fire these Ghebers left behind,
  Do what he would, kept burning still.
Fiercely he stormed, as if his frown
Could scare the bright insurgent down;
But, no--such fires are headstrong things,
And care not much for Lords or Kings.
Scarce could his Lordship well contrive
  The flashes in _one_ place to smother,
Before--hey presto!--all alive,
  They sprung up freshly in another.

At length when, spite of prayers and damns,
  'Twas found the sturdy flame defied him,
His stewards came, with low _salams_,
  Offering, by _contract_, to provide him
Some large Extinguishers, (a plan,
Much used, they said, at Ispahan,
Vienna, Petersburg--in short,
Wherever Light's forbid at court),
Machines no Lord should be without,
Which would at once put promptly out
All kinds of fires,--from staring, stark
Volcanoes to the tiniest spark;
Till all things slept as dull and dark,
As in a great Lord's neighborhood
'Twas right and fitting all things should.

Accordingly, some large supplies
  Of these Extinguishers were furnisht
(All of the true Imperial size),
  And there, in rows, stood black and burnisht,
Ready, where'er a gleam but shone
Of light or fire, to be clapt on.

But ah! how lordly wisdom errs,
In trusting to extinguishers!
One day, when he had left all sure,
(At least, so thought he) dark, secure--
The flame, at all its exits, entries,
  Obstructed to his heart's content,
And black extinguishers, like sentries,
  Placed over every dangerous vent--
Ye Gods, imagine his amaze,
  His wrath, his rage, when, on returning,
He found not only the old blaze,
  Brisk as before, crackling and burning,--
Not only new, young conflagrations,
Popping up round in various stations--
But still more awful, strange and dire,
The Extinguishers themselves on fire!![1]
They, they--those trusty, blind machines
  His Lordship had so long been praising,
As, under Providence, the means
  Of keeping down all lawless blazing,
Were now, themselves--alas, too true,
The shameful fact--turned blazers too,
And by a change as odd as cruel
Instead of dampers, served for fuel!
Thus, of his only hope bereft,
  "What," said the great man, "must be done?"--
All that, in scrapes like this, is left
  To great men is--to cut and run.
So run he did; while to their grounds,
  The banisht Ghebers blest returned;
And, tho' their Fire had broke its bounds,
  And all abroad now wildly burned,
Yet well could they, who loved the flame,
Its wandering, its excess reclaim;
And soon another, fairer Dome
Arose to be its sacred home,
Where, cherisht, guarded, not confined,
The living glory dwelt inshrined,
And, shedding lustre strong, but even,
Tho' born of earth, grew worthy heaven.

MORAL.

The moral hence my Muse infers
  Is, that such Lords are simple elves,
In trusting to Extinguishers,
  That are combustible themselves.


[1] The idea of this Fable was caught from one of those brilliant _mots_,
which abound in the conversation of my friend, the author of the "Letters
to Julia,"--a production which contains some of the happiest specimens of
playful poetry that have appeared in this or any age.






FABLE VIII.

LOUIS FOURTEENTH'S WIG.


The money raised--the army ready--
Drums beating, and the Royal Neddy
Valiantly braying in the van,
To the old tune "_"Eh, eh, Sire Àne_!"[1]--
Naught wanting, but some _coup_ dramatic,
  To make French _sentiment_ explode,
Bring in, at once, the _goût_ fanatic,
  And make the war "_la dernière mode_"--
Instantly, at the _Pavillon Marsan_,
  Is held an Ultra consultation--
What's to be done, to help the farce on?
  What stage-effect, what decoration,
To make this beauteous France forget,
In one, grand, glorious _pirouette_,
All she had sworn to but last week,
And, with a cry of _Magnifique_!"
Rush forth to this, or _any_ war,
Without inquiring once--"What for?"
After some plans proposed by each.
Lord Chateaubriand made a speech,
(Quoting, to show what men's rights are,
  Or rather what men's rights _should be_,
From Hobbes, Lord Castlereagh, the Tsar,
  And other friends to Liberty,)
Wherein he--having first protested
'Gainst humoring the mob--suggested
(As the most high-bred plan he saw
For giving the new War _éclat_)
A grand, Baptismal Melo-drame,
To be got up at Notre Dame,
In which the Duke (who, bless his Highness!
  Had by his _hilt_ acquired such fame,
'Twas hoped that he as little shyness
  Would show, when to _the point_ he came,)
Should, for his deeds so lion-hearted,
Be christened _Hero_, ere he started;
With power, by Royal Ordonnance,
To bear that name--at least in France.
Himself--the Viscount Chateaubriand--
(To help the affair with more _esprit_ on)
Offering, for this baptismal rite,
  Some of his own famed Jordan water[2]--
(Marie Louise not having quite
  Used all that, for young Nap, he brought her.)
The baptism, in _this_ case, to be
Applied to that extremity,
Which Bourbon heroes most expose;
And which (as well all Europe knows)
Happens to be, in this Defender
Of the true Faith, extremely tender.

Or if (the Viscount said) this scheme
Too rash and premature should seem--
If thus discounting heroes, _on_ tick--
  This glory, by anticipation,
Was too much in the _genre romantique_
  For such a highly classic nation,
He begged to say, the Abyssinians
A practice had in their dominions,
Which, if at Paris got up well.
In full _costume_, was sure to tell.
At all great epochs, good or ill,
  They have, says BRUCE (and BRUCE ne'er budges
From the strict truth), a Grand Quadrille
  In public danced by the Twelve Judges[3]--
And he assures us, the grimaces,
The _entre-chats_, the airs and graces
Of dancers, so profound and stately,
Divert the Abyssinians greatly.

"Now (said the Viscount), there's but few
"Great Empires where this plan would do:
"For instance, England;--let them take
  "What pains they would--'twere vain to strive--
"The twelve stiff Judges there would make
  "The worst Quadrille-set now alive.
"One must have seen them, ere one could
"Imagine properly JUDGE WOOD,
"Performing, in hie wig, so gayly,
"A _queue-de chat_ with JUSTICE BAILLY!
"_French_ Judges, tho', are, by no means,
"This sort of stiff, be-wigged machines;
"And we, who've seen them at _Saumur_
"And _Poitiers_ lately, may be sure
"They'd dance quadrilles or anything,
"That would be pleasing to the King--
"Nay, stand upon their heads, and more do,
"To please the little Duc de Bordeaux!"

After these several schemes there came
Some others--needless now to name,
Since that, which Monsieur planned, himself,
Soon doomed all others to the shelf,
And was received _par acclamation_
As truly worthy the _Grande Nation_.

It seems (as Monsieur told the story)
That LOUIS the Fourteenth,--that glory,
That _Coryphée_ of all crowned pates,--
That pink of the Legitimates--
Had, when, with many a pious prayer, he
Bequeathed unto the Virgin Mary
His marriage deeds, and _cordon bleu_,
Bequeathed to her his State Wig too--
(An offering which, at Court, 'tis thought,
The Virgin values as she ought)--
That Wig, the wonder of all eyes,
The Cynosure of Gallia's skies,
To watch and tend whose curls adored,
  Re-build its towering roof, when flat,
And round its rumpled base, a Board
  Of sixty barbers daily sat,
With Subs, on State-Days, to assist,
Well pensioned from the Civil List:--
That wondrous Wig, arrayed in which,
And formed alike to awe or witch.
He beat all other heirs of crowns,
In taking mistresses and towns,
Requiring but a shot at _one_,
A smile at _t'other_, and 'twas done!--

  "That Wig" (said Monsieur, while his brow
Rose proudly,) "is existing now;--
"That Grand Perruque, amid the fall
  "Of every other Royal glory,
"With curls erect survives them all,
  "And tells in every hair their story.
"Think, think, how welcome at this time
"A relic, so beloved, sublime!
"What worthier standard of the Cause
  "Of Kingly Right can France demand?
"Or who among our ranks can pause
  "To guard it, while a curl shall stand?
"Behold, my friends"--(while thus he cried,
A curtain, which concealed this pride
Of Princely Wigs was drawn aside)
"Behold that grand Perruque--how big
  "With recollections for the world--
"For France--for us--Great Louis's Wig,
  "By HIPPOLYTE new frizzed and curled--
"_New frizzed_! alas, 'tis but too true,
"Well may you start at that word _new_--
"But such the sacrifice, my friends,
"The Imperial Cossack recommends;
"Thinking such small concessions sage,
"To meet the spirit of the age,
"And do what best that spirit flatters,
"In Wigs--if not in weightier matters.
  "Wherefore to please the Tsar, and show
"That _we_ too, much-wronged Bourbons, know
"What liberalism in Monarchs is,
"We have conceded the New Friz!
"Thus armed, ye gallant Ultras, say,
"Can men, can Frenchmen, fear the fray?
"With this proud relic in our van,
  "And D'ANGOULEME our worthy leader,
"Let rebel Spain do all she can,
  "Let recreant England arm and feed her,--
"Urged by that pupil of HUNT'S school,
"That Radical, Lord LIVERPOOL--
"France can have naught to fear--far from it--
  "When once astounded Europe sees
"The Wig of LOUIS, like a Comet,
  "Streaming above the Pyrenées,
"All's o'er with Spain--then on, my sons,
  "On, my incomparable Duke,
"And, shouting for the Holy Ones,
  "Cry _Vive la Guerre--et la Perrugue!"_


[1] They celebrated in the dark ages, at many churches, particularly at
Rouen, what was called the Feast of the Ass. On this occasion the ass,
finely drest, was brought before the altar, and they sung before him this
elegant anthem, "_Eh, eh, eh, Sire Àne, eh, eh, eh. Sire Àne_."--
WARTEN'S Essay on Pope.

[2] Brought from the river Jordan by M. Chateaubriand, and presented to
the French Empress for the christening of young Napoleon.

[3] "On certain great occasions, the twelve Judges (who are generally
between sixty and seventy years of age) sing the song and dance the
figure-dance," etc.--Book. v.






RHYMES ON THE ROAD.

EXTRACTED FROM THE JOURNAL OF
A TRAVELLING MEMBER OF
THE POCO-CURANTE SOCIETY,

1819.


The greater part of the following Rhymes were written or composed in an
old _calêche_ for the purpose of beguiling the _ennui_ of solitary
travelling; and as verses made by a gentleman in his sleep, have been
lately called "a _psychological_ curiosity," it is to be hoped that
verses, composed by a gentleman to keep himself awake, may be honored with
some appellation equally Greek.






RHYMES ON THE ROAD




INTRODUCTORY RHYMES.


_Different Attitudes in which Authors compose.--Bayes, Henry Stevens,
Herodotus, etc.--Writing in Bed--in the Fields.--Plato and Sir Richard
Blackmore.--Fiddling with Gloves and Twigs.--Madame de Staël.--Rhyming on
the Road, in an old Calêche_.


What various attitudes and ways
  And tricks we authors have in writing!
While some write sitting, some like BAYES
  Usually stand while they're inditing,
Poets there are who wear the floor out,
  Measuring a line at every stride;
While some like HENRY STEPHENS pour out
  Rhymes by the dozen while they ride.
HERODOTUS wrote most in bed;
  And RICHERAND, a French physician,
Declares the clock-work of the head
  Goes best in that reclined position.
If you consult MONTAIGNE and PLINY on
The subject, 'tis their joint opinion
That Thought its richest harvest yields
Abroad among the woods and fields,
That bards who deal in small retail
  At home may at their counters stop;
But that the grove, the hill, the vale,
  Are Poesy's true wholesale shop.
And verily I think they're right--
  For many a time on summer eves,
Just at that closing hour of light,
  When, like an Eastern Prince, who leaves
For distant war his Haram bowers,
The Sun bids farewell to the flowers,
Whose heads are sunk, whose tears are flowing
Mid all the glory of his going!--
Even _I_ have felt, beneath those beams,
  When wandering thro' the fields alone,
Thoughts, fancies, intellectual gleams,
  Which, far too bright to be my own,
Seemed lent me by the Sunny Power
That was abroad at that still hour.

If thus I've felt, how must _they_ feel,
  The few whom genuine Genius warms,
Upon whose soul he stamps his seal,
  Graven with Beauty's countless forms;--
The few upon this earth, who seem
Born to give truth to PLATO'S dream,
Since in their thoughts, as in a glass,
  Shadows of heavenly things appear.
Reflections of bright shapes that pass
  Thro' other worlds, above our sphere!
But this reminds me I digress;--
  For PLATO, too, produced, 'tis said,
(As one indeed might almost guess),
  His glorious visions all in bed.[1]
'Twas in his carriage the sublime
Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE used to rhyme;
  And (if the wits don’t do him wrong)
Twixt death and epics past his time,[2]
  Scribbling and killing all day long--
Like Phoebus in his car, at ease,
  Now warbling forth a lofty song,
Now murdering the young Niobes.

There was a hero 'mong the Danes,
Who wrote, we're told, mid all the pains
  And horrors of exenteration,
Nine charming odes, which, if you'll look,
  You'll find preserved with a translation
By BARTHOLINOS in his book.
In short 'twere endless to recite
The various modes in which men write.
Some wits are only in the mind.
  When beaus and belles are round them prating;
Some when they dress for dinner find
  Their muse and valet both in waiting
And manage at the self-same time
To adjust a neckcloth and a rhyme.

Some bards there are who cannot scribble
Without a glove to tear or nibble
Or a small twig to whisk about--
  As if the hidden founts of Fancy,
Like wells of old, were thus found out
  By mystic trick of rhabdomancy.
Such was the little feathery wand,[3]
That, held for ever in the hand
Of her who won and wore the crown[4]
  Of female genius in this age,
Seemed the conductor that drew down
  Those words of lightning to her page.

As for myself--to come, at last,
  To the odd way in which _I_ write--
Having employ'd these few months past
  Chiefly in travelling, day and night,
I've got into the easy mode
Of rhyming thus along the road--
Making a way-bill of my pages,
Counting my stanzas by my stages--
'Twixt lays and _re_-lays no time lost--
In short, in two words, _writing post_.


[1] The only authority I know for imputing this practice to Plato and
Herodotus, is a Latin poem by M. de Valois on his Bed, in which he says:--

_Lucifer Herodotum vidit Vesperque cubantem, desedit totos heic Plato
saepe dies_.

[2] Sir Richard Blackmore was a physician, as well as a bad poet.

[3] Made of paper, twisted up like a fan or feather.

[4] Madame de Staël.






EXTRACT I.

Geneva.


_View of the Lake of Geneva from the Jura.[1]--Anxious to reach it
before the Sun went down.--Obliged to proceed on Foot.--Alps.--Mont
Blanc.--Effect of the Scene_.


'Twas late--the sun had almost shone
His last and best when I ran on
Anxious to reach that splendid view
Before the daybeams quite withdrew
And feeling as all feel on first
  Approaching scenes where, they are told,
Such glories on their eyes will burst
  As youthful bards in dreams behold.

'Twas distant yet and as I ran
  Full often was my wistful gaze
Turned to the sun who now began
  To call in all his out-posts rays,
And form a denser march of light,
Such as beseems a hero's flight.
Oh, how I wisht for JOSHUA'S power,
To stay the brightness of that hour?
But no--the sun still less became,
  Diminisht to a speck as splendid
And small as were those tongues of flame,
  That on the Apostles' heads descended!

'Twas at this instant--while there glowed
  This last, intensest gleam of light--
Suddenly thro' the opening road
  The valley burst upon my sight!
That glorious valley with its Lake
  And Alps on Alps in clusters swelling,
Mighty and pure and fit to make
  The ramparts of a Godhead's dwelling.

I stood entranced--as Rabbins say
  This whole assembled, gazing world
Will stand, upon that awful day,
  When the Ark's Light aloft unfurled
Among the opening clouds shall shine,
Divinity's own radiant sign!

Mighty MONT BLANC, thou wert to me
  That minute, with thy brow in heaven,
As sure a sign of Deity
  As e'er to mortal gaze was given.
Nor ever, were I destined yet
  To live my life twice o'er again,
Can I the deep-felt awe forget,
  The dream, the trance that rapt me then!

'Twas all that consciousness of power
And life, beyond this mortal hour;--
Those mountings of the soul within
At thoughts of Heaven--as birds begin
By instinct in the cage to rise,
When near their time for change of skies;--
That proud assurance of our claim
  To rank among the Sons of Light,
Mingled with shame--oh bitter shame!--
  At having riskt that splendid right,
For aught that earth thro' all its range
Of glories offers in exchange!
'Twas all this, at that instant brought
Like breaking sunshine o'er my thought--
'Twas all this, kindled to a glow
  Of sacred zeal which could it shine
Thus purely ever man might grow,
  Even upon earth a thing divine,
And be once more the creature made
To walk unstained the Elysian shade!

No, never shall I lose the trace
Of what I've felt in this bright place.
And should my spirit's hope grow weak,
  Should I, oh God! e'er doubt thy power,
This mighty scene again I'll seek,
  At the same calm and glowing hour,
And here at the sublimest shrine
  That Nature ever reared to Thee
Rekindle all that hope divine
  And _feel_ my immortality!


[1] Between Vattay and Gex.






EXTRACT II.

Geneva.

FATE OF GENEVA IN THE YEAR 1782.

A FRAGMENT.


Yes--if there yet live some of those,
Who, when this small Republic rose,
Quick as a startled hive of bees,
Against her leaguering enemies--[1]
When, as the Royal Satrap shook
  His well-known fetters at her gates,
Even wives and mothers armed and took
  Their stations by their sons and mates;
And on these walls there stood--yet, no,
  Shame to the traitors--_would_ have stood
As firm a band as e'er let flow
  At Freedom's base their sacred blood;
If those yet live, who on that night
When all were watching, girt for fight,
Stole like the creeping of a pest
From rank to rank, from breast to breast,
Filling the weak, the old with fears,
Turning the heroine's zeal to tears,--
Betraying Honor to that brink,
Where, one step more, and he must sink--
And quenching hopes which tho' the last,
Like meteors on a drowning mast,
Would yet have led to death more bright,
Than life e'er lookt, in all its light!
Till soon, too soon, distrust, alarms
  Throughout the embattled thousands ran,
And the high spirit, late in arms,
The zeal that might have workt such charms,
  Fell like a broken talisman--
Their gates, that they had sworn should be
  The gates of Death, that very dawn,
Gave passage widely, bloodlessly,
  To the proud foe--nor sword was drawn,
Nor even one martyred body cast
To stain their footsteps, as they past;
But of the many sworn at night
To do or die, some fled the sight,
Some stood to look with sullen frown,
  While some in impotent despair
Broke their bright armor and lay down,
  Weeping, upon the fragments there!--
If those, I say, who brought that shame,
That blast upon GENEVA'S name
Be living still--tho' crime so dark
  Shall hang up, fixt and unforgiven,
In History's page, the eternal mark
  For Scorn to pierce--so help me, Heaven,
I wish the traitorous slaves no worse,
  No deeper, deadlier disaster
From all earth's ills no fouler curse
  Than to have *********** their master!


[1] In the year 1782, when the forces of Berne, Sardinia, and France laid
siege to Geneva, and when, after a demonstration of heroism and
self-devotion, which promised to rival the feats of their ancestors in
1602 against Savoy, the Genevans, either panic-struck or betrayed, to the
surprise of all Europe, opened their gates to the besiegers, and submitted
without a struggle to the extinction of their liberties--See an account of
this Revolution in Coxe's Switzerland.






EXTRACT III.

Geneva.

_Fancy and Truth--Hippomenes and Atalanta. Mont Blanc.--Clouds_.


Even here in this region of wonders I find
That light-footed Fancy leaves Truth far behind;
Or at least like Hippomenes turns her astray
By the golden illusions he flings in her way.

What a glory it seemed the first evening I gazed!
MONT BLANC like a vision then suddenly raised
On the wreck of the sunset--and all his array
  Of high-towering Alps, touched still with a light
Far holier, purer than that of the Day,
  As if nearness to Heaven had made them so bright!
Then the dying at last of these splendors away
From peak after peak, till they left but a ray,
One roseate ray, that, too precious to fly,
  O'er the Mighty of Mountains still glowingly hung,
Like the last sunny step of ASTRAEA, when high,
  From the summit of earth to Elysium she sprung!
And those infinite Alps stretching out from the sight
Till they mingled with Heaven, now shorn of their light,
Stood lofty and lifeless and pale in the sky,
Like the ghosts of a Giant Creation gone by!

That scene--I have viewed it this evening again,
By the same brilliant light that hung over it then--
The valley, the lake in their tenderest charms--
  MONT BLANC in his awfullest pomp--and the whole
A bright picture of Beauty, reclined in the arms
  Of Sublimity, bridegroom elect of her soul!
But where are the mountains that round me at first
One dazzling horizon of miracles burst?
Those Alps beyond Alps, without end swelling on
Like the waves of eternity--where are _they_ gone?
Clouds--clouds--they were nothing but clouds, after all![1]
  That chain of MONT BLANC'S, which my fancy flew o'er,
With a wonder that naught on this earth can recall,
  Were but clouds of the evening and now are no more.

What a picture of Life's young illusions! Oh, Night,
Drop thy curtain at once and hide _all_ from my sight.


[1] It is often very difficult to distinguish between clouds and
Alps; and on the evening when I first saw this magnificent scene, the
clouds were so disposed along the whole horizon, as to deceive me into an
idea of the stupendous extent of these mountains, which my subsequent
observation was very far, of course, from confirming.






EXTRACT IV.

Milan.


_The Picture Gallery.--Albano's Rape of Proserpine.--Reflections.--
Universal Salvation.--Abraham sending away Agar, by Guercino.--Genius_.


Went to the _Brera_--saw a Dance of Loves
  By smooth ALBANO! him whose pencil teems
With Cupids numerous as in summer groves
  The leaflets are or motes in summer beams.

'Tis for the theft of Enna's flower from earth,
These urchins celebrate their dance of mirth
Round the green tree, like fays upon a heath--
  Those that are nearest linkt in order bright,
Cheek after cheek, like rose-buds in a wreath;
And those more distant showing from beneath
  The others' wings their little eyes of light.
While see! among the clouds, their eldest brother
  But just flown up tells with a smile of bliss
This prank of Pluto to his charmed mother
  Who turns to greet the tidings with a kiss!

Well might the Loves rejoice--and well did they
  Who wove these fables picture in their weaving
That blessed truth, (which in a darker day
  ORIGEN lost his saintship for believing,[1])--
That Love, eternal Love, whose fadeless ray
  Nor time nor death nor sin can overcast,
Even to the depths of hell will find his way,
  And soothe and heal and triumph there at last!
GUERCINO'S Agar--where the bondmaid hears
  From Abram's lips that he and she must part,
And looks at him with eyes all full of tears
  That seem the very last drops from her heart.
Exquisite picture!--let me not be told
Of minor faults, of coloring tame and cold--
If thus to conjure up a face so fair,[2]
So full of sorrow; with the story there
Of all that woman suffers when the stay
Her trusting heart hath leaned on falls away--
If thus to touch the bosom's tenderest spring,
By calling into life such eyes as bring
Back to our sad remembrance some of those
We've smiled and wept with in their joys and woes,
Thus filling them with tears, like tears we've known,
Till all the pictured grief becomes our own--
If _this_ be deemed the victory of Art--
  If thus by pen or pencil to lay bare
The deep, fresh, living fountains of the heart
  Before all eyes be Genius--it is _there_!


[1] The extension of the Divine Love ultimately even to the
regions of the damned.

[2] It is probable that this fine head is a portrait, as we find
it repeated in a picture by Guercino, which is in the possession of Signor
Carnuccini, the brother of the celebrated painter at Rome.






EXTRACT V.

Padua.


_Fancy and Reality.--Rain-drops and Lakes.--Plan of a Story.--Where to
place the Scene of it.--In some unknown Region.--Psalmanazar's Imposture
with respect to the Island of Formosa_.


The more I've viewed this world the more I've found,
  That, filled as 'tis with scenes and creatures rare.
Fancy commands within her own bright round
  A world of scenes and creatures far more fair.
Nor is it that her power can call up there
  A single charm, that's not from Nature won,
No more than rainbows in their pride can wear
  A single hue unborrowed from the sun--
But 'tis the mental medium it shines thro'
That lends to Beauty all its charm and hue;
As the same light that o'er the level lake
  One dull monotony of lustre flings,
Will, entering in the rounded raindrop, make
  Colors as gay as those on Peris' wings!

  And such, I deem, the difference between real,
Existing Beauty and that form ideal
Which she assumes when seen by poets' eyes,
Like sunshine in the drop--with all those dyes
Which Fancy's variegating prism supples.

I have a story of two lovers, filled
  With all the pure romance, the blissful sadness,
And the sad, doubtful bliss that ever thrilled
  Two young and longing hearts in that sweet madness.
But where to choose the region of my vision
  In this wide, vulgar world--what real spot
Can be found out sufficiently Elysian
  For two such perfect lovers I know not.
Oh for some fair FORMOSA, such as he,
The young Jew fabled of, in the Indian Sea,
By nothing but its name of Beauty known,
And which Queen Fancy might make all her own,
Her fairy kingdom--take its people, lands,
And tenements into her own bright hands,
And make at least one earthly corner fit
For Love to live in, pure and exquisite!






EXTRACT VI.

Venice.


_The Fall of Venice not to be lamented--Former Glory.--Expedition
against Constantinople.--Giustinianis.--Republic.--Characteristics of the
old Government.--Golden Book.--Brazen Mouths.--Spies.--Dungeons.--Present
Desolation_.


Mourn not for VENICE--let her rest
In ruin, 'mong those States unblest,
Beneath whose gilded hoofs of pride,
Where'er they trampled, Freedom died.
No--let us keep our tears for them,
  Where'er they pine, whose fall hath been
Not from a blood-stained diadem,
  Like that which deckt this ocean-queen,
But from high daring in the cause
  Of human Rights--the only good
And blessed strife, in which man draws
  His mighty sword on land or flood.

Mourn not for VENICE; tho' her fall
  Be awful, as if Ocean's wave
Swept o'er her, she deserves it all,
  And Justice triumphs o'er her grave.
Thus perish every King and State
  That run the guilty race she ran,
Strong but in ill and only great
  By outrage against God and man!

True, her high spirit is at rest,
  And all those days of glory gone,
When the world's waters, east and west,
  Beneath her white-winged commerce shone;
When with her countless barks she went
  To meet the Orient Empire's might.[1]
And her Giustinianis sent
  Their hundred heroes to that fight.

Vanisht are all her pomps, 'tis true,
But mourn them not--for vanisht too
  (Thanks to that Power, who soon or late,
  Hurls to the dust the guilty Great,)
Are all the outrage, falsehood, fraud,
  The chains, the rapine, and the blood,
That filled each spot, at home, abroad,
  Where the Republic's standard stood.
Desolate VENICE! when I track
Thy haughty course thro' centuries back;
Thy ruthless power, obeyed but curst--
  The stern machinery of thy State,
Which hatred would, like steam, have burst,
  Had stronger fear not chilled even hate;--
Thy perfidy, still worse than aught
Thy own unblushing SARPI[2] taught;--
Thy friendship which, o'er all beneath
Its shadow, rained down dews of death;[3]--
Thy Oligarchy's Book of Gold,
  Closed against humble Virtue's name,
But opened wide for slaves who sold
  Their native land to thee and shame;[4]--
Thy all-pervading host of spies
  Watching o'er every glance and breath,
Till men lookt in each others' eyes,
  To read their chance of life or death;--
Thy laws that made a mart of blood,
  And legalized the assassin's knife;[5]--
Thy sunless cells beneath the flood,
  And racks and Leads that burnt out life;--

When I review all this and see
The doom that now hath fallen on thee;
Thy nobles, towering once so proud,
Themselves beneath the yoke now bowed,--
A yoke by no one grace redeemed,
Such as of old around thee beamed,
But mean and base as e'er yet galled
Earth's tyrants when themselves enthralled,--
I feel the moral vengeance sweet.
And smiling o'er the wreck repeat:--
"Thus perish every King and State
  "That tread the steps which VENICE trod,
"Strong but in ill and only great,
  "By outrage against man and God!"


[1] Under the Doge Michaeli, in 1171.

[2] The celebrated Fra Paolo. The collections of Maxims which this bold
monk drew up at the request of the Venetian Government, for the guidance
of the Secret Inquisition of State, are so atrocious as to seem rather an
over-charged satire upon despotism, than a system of policy, seriously
inculcated, and but too readily and constantly pursued.

[3] Conduct of Venice towards her allies and dependencies, particularly to
unfortunate Padua.

[4] Among those admitted to the honor of being inscribed in the _Libro
d'oro_ were some families of Brescia, Treviso, and other places, whose
only claim to that distinction was the zeal with which they prostrated
themselves and their country at the feet of the republic.

[5] By the infamous statutes of the State Inquisition, not only was
assassination recognized as a regular mode of punishment, but this secret
power over life was delegated to their minions at a distance, with nearly
as much facility as a licence is given under the game laws of England. The
only restriction seems to have been the necessity of applying for a new
certificate, after every individual exercise of the power.






EXTRACT VII.

Venice.


_Lord Byron's Memoirs, written by himself.--Reflections, when about to
read them_.


Let me a moment--ere with fear and hope
Of gloomy, glorious things, these leaves I ope--
As one in fairy tale to whom the key
  Of some enchanter's secret halls is given,
Doubts while he enters slowly, tremblingly,
  If he shall meet with shapes from hell or heaven--
Let me a moment think what thousands live
O'er the wide earth this instant who would give,
Gladly, whole sleepless nights to bend the brow
Over these precious leaves, as I do now.

How all who know--and where is he unknown?
To what far region have his songs not flown,
Like PSAPHON'S birds[1] speaking their master's name,
In every language syllabled by Fame?--
How all who've felt the various spells combined
Within the circle of that mastermind,--
Like spells derived from many a star and met
Together in some wondrous amulet,--
Would burn to know when first the Light awoke
In his young soul,--and if the gleams that broke
From that Aurora of his genius, raised
Most pain or bliss in those on whom they blazed;
Would love to trace the unfolding of that power,
Which had grown ampler, grander, every hour;
And feel in watching o'er his first advance
  As did the Egyptian traveller[2] when he stood
By the young Nile and fathomed with his lance
  The first small fountains of that mighty flood.

They too who mid the scornful thoughts that dwell
  In his rich fancy, tingeing all its streams,--
As if the Star of Bitterness which fell
  On earth of old,[3] had touched them with its beams,--
Can track a spirit which tho' driven to hate,
From Nature's hands came kind, affectionate;
And which even now, struck as it is with blight,
Comes out at times in love's own native light;--
How gladly all who've watched these struggling rays
Of a bright, ruined spirit thro' his lays,
Would here inquire, as from his own frank lips,
  What desolating grief, what wrongs had driven
That noble nature into cold eclipse;
  Like some fair orb that, once a sun in heaven.
And born not only to surprise but cheer
With warmth and lustre all within its sphere,
Is now so quenched that of its grandeur lasts
Naught but the wide, cold shadow which it casts.

Eventful volume! whatsoe'er the change
Of scene and clime--the adventures bold and strange--
The griefs--the frailties but too frankly told--
The loves, the feuds thy pages may unfold,
If Truth with half so prompt a hand unlocks
  His virtues as his failings, we shall find
The record there of friendships held like rocks,
  And enmities like sun-touched snow resigned;
Of fealty, cherisht without change or chill,
In those who served him, young, and serve him still;
Of generous aid given, with that noiseless art
Which wakes not pride, to many a wounded heart;
Of acts--but, no--_not_ from himself must aught
Of the bright features of his life be sought.

While they who court the world, like Milton's cloud,
"Turn forth their silver lining" on the crowd,
This gifted Being wraps himself in night;
  And keeping all that softens and adorns
And gilds his social nature hid from sight,
  Turns but its darkness on a world he scorns.


[1] Psaphon, in order to attract the attention of the world, taught
multitudes of birds to speak his name, and then let them fly away in
various directions; whence the proverb, "Psaphonis aves."

[2] Bruce.

[3] "And the name of the star is called Wormwood, and the third part of
the waters became wormwood."--_Rev_. viii.






EXTRACT VIII.

Venice.


_Female Beauty at Venice.--No longer what it was in the time of Titian.--
His mistress.--Various Forms in which he has painted her.--Venus.--Divine
and profane Love.--La Fragilita d'Amore--Paul Veronese.--His Women.--
Marriage of Cana.--Character of Italian Beauty.--Raphael's Fornarina.--
Modesty_.


Thy brave, thy learned have passed away:
Thy beautiful!--ah, where are they?
The forms, the faces that once shone,
  Models of grace, in Titian's eye,
Where are they now, while flowers live on
  In ruined places, why, oh! why
  Must Beauty thus with Glory die?
That maid whose lips would still have moved,
  Could art have breathed a spirit through them;
Whose varying charms her artist loved
  More fondly every time he drew them,
(So oft beneath his touch they past,
Each semblance fairer than the last);
Wearing each shape that Fancy's range
  Offers to Love--yet still the one
Fair idol seen thro' every change,
  Like facets of some orient stone,--
  In each the same bright image shown.
Sometimes a Venus, unarrayed
  But in her beauty[1]--sometimes deckt
In costly raiment, as a maid
  That kings might for a throne select.[2]
Now high and proud, like one who thought
The world should at her feet be brought;
Now with a look reproachful sad,[3]--
Unwonted look from brow so glad,--
And telling of a pain too deep
For tongue to speak or eyes to weep.
Sometimes thro' allegory's veil,
  In double semblance seemed to shine,
Telling a strange and mystic tale
  Of Love Profane and Love Divine[4]--
Akin in features, but in heart
As far as earth and heaven apart.
Or else (by quaint device to prove
The frailty of all worldly love)
Holding a globe of glass as thin
  As air-blown bubbles in her hand,
With a young Love confined therein,
  Whose wings seem waiting to expand--
And telling by her anxious eyes
That if that frail orb break he flies.[5]

Thou too with touch magnificent,
PAUL of VERONA!--where are they?
The oriental forms[6] that lent
Thy canvas such a bright array?
Noble and gorgeous dames whose dress
Seems part of their own loveliness;
Like the sun's drapery which at eve
The floating clouds around him weave
Of light they from himself receive!
Where is there now the living face
  Like those that in thy nuptial throng[7]
By their superb, voluptuous grace,
Make us forget the time, the place,
  The holy guests they smile among,--
Till in that feast of heaven-sent wine
We see no miracles but thine.

If e'er, except in Painting's dream,
There bloomed such beauty here, 'tis gone,--
Gone like the face that in the stream
  Of Ocean for an instant shone,
When Venus at that mirror gave
A last look ere she left the wave.
And tho', among the crowded ways,
We oft are startled by the blaze
  Of eyes that pass with fitful light.
Like fire-flies on the wing at night[8]
'Tis not that nobler beauty given
To show how angels look in heaven.
Even in its shape most pure and fair,
'Tis Beauty with but half her zone,
All that can warm the sense is there,
  But the Soul's deeper charm has flown:--
'Tis RAPHAEL's Fornarina,--warm,
  Luxuriant, arch, but unrefined;
A flower round which the noontide swarm
  Of young Desires may buzz and wind,
But where true Love no treasure meets
Worth hoarding in his hive of sweets.

Ah no,--for this and for the hue
  Upon the rounded cheek, which tells
How fresh within the heart this dew
  Of love's unrifled sweetness dwells,
We must go back to our own Isles,
  Where Modesty, which here but gives
A rare and transient grace to smiles,
  In the heart's holy centre lives;
And thence as from her throne diffuses
  O'er thoughts and looks so bland a reign,
That not a thought or feeling loses
  Its freshness in that gentle chain.


[1] In the Tribune at Florence.

[2] In the Palazzo Pitti.

[3] Alludes particularly to the portrait of her in the Sciarra collection
at Rome, where the look of mournful reproach in those full, shadowy eyes,
as if she had been unjustly accused of something wrong, is exquisite.

[4] The fine picture in the Palazzo Borghese, called (it is not easy to
say why) "Sacred and Profane Love," in which the two figures, sitting on
the edge of the fountain, are evidently portraits of the same person.

[5] This fanciful allegory is the subject of a picture by Titian in the
possession of the Marquis Cambian at Turin, whose collection, though
small, contains some beautiful specimens of all the great masters.

[6] As Paul Veronese gave but little into the _beau idéal_, his women
may be regarded as pretty close imitations of the living models which
Venice afforded in his time.

[7] The Marriage of Cana.

[8] "Certain it is [as Arthur Young truly and feelingly says] one now and
then meets with terrible eyes in Italy."






EXTRACT IX.

Venice.


_The English to be met with everywhere.--Alps and Threadneedle
Street.--The Simplon and the Stocks.--Rage for travelling.--Blue Stockings
among the Wahabees.--Parasols and Pyramids.--Mrs. Hopkins and the Wall of
China_.


And is there then no earthly place,
  Where we can rest in dream Elysian,
Without some curst, round English face,
  Popping up near to break the vision?
Mid northern lakes, mid southern vines,
  Unholy cits we're doomed to meet;
Nor highest Alps nor Apennines
  Are sacred from Threadneedle Street!

If up the Simplon's path we wind,
Fancying we leave this world behind,
Such pleasant sounds salute one's ear
As--"Baddish news from 'Change, my dear--
"The funds--(phew I curse this ugly hill)--
"Are lowering fast--(what, higher still?)--
"And--(zooks, we're mounting up to heaven!)--
"Will soon be down to sixty-seven."

Go where we may--rest where we will.
Eternal London haunts us still.
The trash of Almack's or Fleet Ditch--
And scarce a pin's head difference _which_--
Mixes, tho' even to Greece we run,
With every rill from Helicon!
And if this rage for travelling lasts,
If Cockneys of all sects and castes,
Old maidens, aldermen, and squires,
_Will_ leave their puddings and coal fires,
To gape at things in foreign lands
No soul among them understands;
If Blues desert their coteries,
To show off 'mong the Wahabees;
If neither sex nor age controls,
  Nor fear of Mamelukes forbids
Young ladies with pink parasols
  To glide among the Pyramids--

Why, then, farewell all hope to find
A spot that's free from London-kind!
Who knows, if to the West we roam,
But we may find some _Blue_ "at home"
  Among the Blacks of Carolina--
Or flying to the Eastward see
Some Mrs. HOPKINS taking tea
  And toast upon the Wall of China!






EXTRACT X.

Mantua.


_Verses of Hippolyta to her Husband_.


They tell me thou'rt the favored guest
  Of every fair and brilliant throng;
No wit like thine to wake the jest,
  No voice like thine to breathe the song.
And none could guess, so gay thou art,
That thou and I are far apart.
Alas, alas! how different flows,
  With thee and me the time away!
Not that I wish thee sad, heaven knows--
  Still if thou canst, be light and gay;
I only know that without thee
The sun himself is dark for me.

Do I put on the jewels rare
Thou'st always loved to see me wear?
Do I perfume the locks that thou
So oft hast braided o'er my brow,
Thus deckt thro' festive crowds to run,
  And all the assembled world to see,--
All but the one, the absent one,
  Worth more than present worlds to me!
No, nothing cheers this widowed heart--
My only joy from thee apart,
From thee thyself, is sitting hours
  And days before thy pictured form--
That dream of thee, which Raphael's powers
  Have made with all but life-breath warm!
And as I smile to it, and say
The words I speak to thee in play,
I fancy from their silent frame,
Those eyes and lips give back the same:
And still I gaze, and still they keep
Smiling thus on me--till I weep!
Our little boy too knows it well,
  For there I lead him every day
And teach his lisping lips to tell
  The name of one that's far away.
Forgive me, love, but thus alone
My time is cheered while thou art gone.






EXTRACT XI.

Florence.


No--'tis not the region where Love's to be found--
  They have bosoms that sigh, they have glances that rove,
They have language a Sappho's own lip might resound,
  When she warbled her best--but they've nothing like Love.

Nor is't that pure _sentiment_ only they want,
  Which Heaven for the mild and the tranquil hath made--
Calm, wedded affection, that home-rooted plant
  Which sweetens seclusion and smiles in the shade;

That feeling which, after long years have gone by,
  Remains like a portrait we've sat for in youth,
Where, even tho' the flush of the colors may fly,
  The features still live in their first smiling truth;

That union where all that in Woman is kind,
  With all that in Man most ennoblingly towers,
Grow wreathed into one--like the column, combined
  Of the _strength_ of the shaft and the capital's _flowers_.

Of this--bear ye witness, ye wives, everywhere,
  By the ARNO, the PO, by all ITALY'S streams--
Of this heart-wedded love, so delicious to share,
  Not a husband hath even one glimpse in his dreams.

But it _is_ not this only;--born full of the light
  Of a sun from whose fount the luxuriant festoons
Of these beautiful valleys drink lustre so bright
  That beside him our suns of the north are but moons,--

We might fancy at least, like their climate they burned;
  And that Love tho' unused in this region of spring
To be thus to a tame Household Deity turned,
  Would yet be all soul when abroad on the wing.

And there _may_ be, there _are_ those explosions of heart
  Which burst when the senses have first caught the flame;
Such fits of the blood as those climates impart,
  Where Love is a sun-stroke that maddens the frame.

But that Passion which springs in the depth of the soul;
  Whose beginnings are virginly pure as the source
Of some small mountain rivulet destined to roll
  As a torrent ere long, losing peace in its course--

A course to which Modesty's struggle but lends
  A more headlong descent without chance of recall;
But which Modesty even to the last edge attends,
  And then throws a halo of tears round its fall!

This exquisite Passion--ay, exquisite, even
  Mid the ruin its madness too often hath made,
As it keeps even then a bright trace of the heaven,
  That heaven of Virtue from which it has strayed--

This entireness of love which can only be found,
Where Woman like something that's holy, watched over,
And fenced from her childhood with purity round,
Comes body and soul fresh as Spring to a lover!

Where not an eye answers, where not a hand presses,
Till spirit with spirit in sympathy move;
And the Senses asleep in their sacred recesses
Can only be reached thro' the temple of Love!--

This perfection of Passion-how can it be found,
Where the mystery Nature hath hung round the tie
By which souls are together attracted and bound,
Is laid open for ever to heart,
ear and eye;--

Where naught of that innocent doubt can exist,
That ignorance even than knowledge more bright,
Which circles the young like the morn's sunny mist,
And curtains them round in their own native light;--

Where Experience leaves nothing for Love to reveal,
Or for Fancy in visions to gleam o'er the thought:
But the truths which alone we would die to conceal
From the maiden's young heart are the only ones taught.

No, no, 'tis not here, howsoever we sigh,
Whether purely to Hymen's one planet we pray,
Or adore, like Sabaeans, each light of Love's sky,
Here is not the region to fix or to stray.

For faithless in wedlock, in gallantry gross,
Without honor to guard, to reserve, to restrain,
What have they a husband can mourn as a loss?
What have they a lover can prize as a gain?






EXTRACT XII.

Florence.


_Music in Italy.--Disappointed by it.--Recollections or other Times and
Friends.--Dalton.--Sir John Stevenson.--His Daughter.--Musical Evenings
together_.


If it be true that Music reigns,
  Supreme, in ITALY'S soft shades,
'Tis like that Harmony so famous,
Among the spheres, which He of SAMOS
Declared had such transcendent merit
That not a soul on earth could hear it;
For, far as I have come--from Lakes,
Whose sleep the Tramontana breaks,
Thro' MILAN and that land which gave
The Hero of the rainbow vest[1]--
By MINCIO'S banks, and by that wave,
Which made VERONA'S bard so blest--
Places that (like the Attic shore,
Which rung back music when the sea
Struck on its marge) should be all o'er
Thrilling alive with melody--
I've heard no music--not a note
Of such sweet native airs as float
In my own land among the throng
And speak our nation's soul for song.

Nay, even in higher walks, where Art
Performs, as 'twere, the gardener's part,
And richer if not sweeter makes
The flowers she from the wild-hedge takes--
Even there, no voice hath charmed my ear,
  No taste hath won my perfect praise,
Like thine, dear friend[2]--long, truly dear--
  Thine, and thy loved OLIVIA'S lays.
She, always beautiful, and growing
  Still more so every note she sings--
Like an inspired young Sibyl,[3] glowing
  With her own bright imaginings!
And thou, most worthy to be tied
  In music to her, as in love,
Breathing that language by her side,
  All other language far above,
Eloquent Song--whose tones and words
In every heart find answering chords!

How happy once the hours we past,
  Singing or listening all daylong,
Till Time itself seemed changed at last
  To music, and we lived in song!
Turning the leaves of HAYDN o'er,
  As quick beneath her master hand
They opened all their brilliant store,
  Like chambers, touched by fairy wand;
Or o'er the page of MOZART bending,
  Now by his airy warblings cheered,
Now in his mournful _Requiem_ blending
  Voices thro' which the heart was heard.
And still, to lead our evening choir,
Was He invoked, thy loved-one's Sire[4]--
He who if aught of grace there be
  In the wild notes I write or sing,
First smoothed their links of harmony,
  And lent them charms they did not bring;--
He, of the gentlest, simplest heart,
With whom, employed in his sweet art,
(That art which gives this world of ours
  A notion how they speak in heaven.)
I've past more bright and charmed hours
  Than all earth's wisdom could have given.
Oh happy days, oh early friends,
  How Life since then hath lost its flowers!
But yet--tho' Time _some_ foliage rends,
  The stem, the Friendship, still is ours;
And long may it endure, as green
And fresh as it hath always been!

How I have wandered from my theme!
  But where is he, that could return
To such cold subjects from a dream,
  Thro' which these best of feelings burn?--
Not all the works of Science, Art,
  Or Genius in this world are worth
One genuine sigh that from the heart
  Friendship or Love draws freshly forth.


[1] Bermago--the birthplace, it is said, of Harlequin.

[2] Edward Tuite Dalton, the first husband of Sir John Stevenson's
daughter, the late Marchioness of Headfort.

[3] Such as those of Domenichino in the Palazza Borghese, at the
Capitol, etc.

[4] Sir John Stevenson.






EXTRACT XIII.

Rome.


_Reflections on reading Du Cerceau's Account of the Conspiracy of
Rienzi, in 1347.--The Meeting of the Conspirators on the Night of the 19th
of May.--Their Procession in the Morning to the Capitol.--Rienzi's
Speech_.


'Twas a proud moment--even to hear the words
  Of Truth and Freedom mid these temples breathed,
And see once more the Forum shine with swords
  In the Republic's sacred name unsheathed--
That glimpse, that vision of a brighter day
  For his dear ROME, must to a Roman be,
Short as it was, worth ages past away
  In the dull lapse of hopeless slavery.

'Twas on a night of May, beneath that moon
Which had thro' many an age seen Time untune
The strings of this Great Empire, till it fell
From his rude hands, a broken, silent shell--
The sound of the church clock near ADRIAN'S Tomb
Summoned the warriors who had risen for ROME,
To meet unarmed,--with none to watch them there,
But God's own eye,--and pass the night in prayer.
Holy beginning of a holy cause,
When heroes girt for Freedom's combat pause
Before high Heaven, and humble in their might
Call down its blessing on that coming fight.

At dawn, in arms went forth the patriot band;
And as the breeze, fresh from the TIBER, fanned
Their gilded gonfalons, all eyes could see
  The palm-tree there, the sword, the keys of Heaven--
Types of the justice, peace and liberty,
  That were to bless them when their chains were riven.
On to the Capitol the pageant moved,
  While many a Shade of other times, that still
Around that grave of grandeur sighing roved,
  Hung o'er their footsteps up the Sacred Hill
And heard its mournful echoes as the last
High-minded heirs of the Republic past.
'Twas then that thou, their Tribune,[1] (name which brought
Dreams of lost glory to each patriot's thought,)
Didst, with a spirit Rome in vain shall seek
To wake up in her sons again, thus speak:--
"ROMANS, look round you--on this sacred place
  "There once stood shrines and gods and godlike men.
"What see you now? what solitary trace
  "Is left of all that made ROME'S glory then?
"The shrines are sunk, the Sacred Mount bereft
  "Even of its name--and nothing now remains
"But the deep memory of that glory, left
  "To whet our pangs and aggravate our chains!
"But _shall_ this be?--our sun and sky the same,--
  "Treading the very soil our fathers trod,--
"What withering curse hath fallen on soul and frame,
  "What visitation hath there come from God
"To blast our strength and rot us into slaves,
"_Here_ on our great forefathers' glorious graves?
"It cannot be--rise up, ye Mighty Dead,--
  "If we, the living, are too weak to crush
"These tyrant priests that o'er your empire tread,
  "Till all but Romans at Rome's tameness blush!

"Happy, PALMYRA, in thy desert domes
  "Where only date-trees sigh and serpents hiss;
"And thou whose pillars are but silent homes
  "For the stork's brood, superb PERSEPOLIS!
"Thrice happy both, that your extinguisht race
"Have left no embers--no half-living trace--
"No slaves to crawl around the once proud spot,
"Till past renown in present shame's forgot.
"While ROME, the Queen of all, whose very wrecks,
  "If lone and lifeless thro' a desert hurled,
"Would wear more true magnificence than decks
  "The assembled thrones of all the existing world--
"ROME, ROME alone, is haunted, stained and curst,
  "Thro' every spot her princely TIBER laves,
"By living human things--the deadliest, worst,
  "This earth engenders--tyrants and their slaves!
"And we--oh shame!--we who have pondered o'er
  "The patriot's lesson and the poet's lay;[2]
"Have mounted up the streams of ancient lore,
  "Tracking our country's glories all the way--
"Even _we_ have tamely, basely kist the ground
  "Before that Papal Power,--that Ghost of Her,
"The World's Imperial Mistress--sitting crowned
  "And ghastly on her mouldering sepulchre![3]
"But this is past:--too long have lordly priests
  "And priestly lords led us, with all our pride
"Withering about us--like devoted beasts,
  "Dragged to the shrine, with faded garlands tied.
"'Tis o'er--the dawn of our deliverance breaks!
"Up from his sleep of centuries awakes
"The Genius of the Old Republic, free
"As first he stood, in chainless majesty,
"And sends his voice thro' ages yet to come,
"Proclaiming ROME, ROME, ROME, Eternal ROME!"


[1] Rienzi.

[2] The fine Canzone of Petrarch, beginning _"Spirto gentil,"_ is
supposed, by Voltaire and others, to have been addressed to Rienzi; but
there is much more evidence of its having been written, as Ginguené
asserts, to the young Stephen Colonna, on his being created a Senator of
Rome.

[3] This image is borrowed from Hobbes, whose words are, as near as I can
recollect:--"For what is the Papacy, but the Ghost of the old Roman
Empire, sitting crowned on the grave thereof?"




EXTRACT XIV.

Rome.


_Fragment of a Dream.--The great Painters supposed to be Magicians.--The
Beginnings of the Art.--Gildings on the Glories and Draperies.--
Improvements under Giotto, etc.--The first Dawn of the true Style in
Masaccio.--Studied by all the great Artists who followed him.--Leonardo da
Vinci, with whom commenced the Golden Age of Painting.--His Knowledge of
Mathematics and of Music.--His female heads all like each other.--
Triangular Faces.--Portraits of Mona Lisa, etc.--Picture of Vanity and
Modesty.--His_ chef-d'oeuvre, _the Last Supper.--Faded and almost
effaced_.


Filled with the wonders I had seen
  In Rome's stupendous shrines and halls,
I felt the veil of sleep serene
Come o'er the memory of each scene,
  As twilight o'er the landscape falls.
Nor was it slumber, sound and deep,
  But such as suits a poet's rest--
That sort of thin, transparent sleep,
  Thro' which his day-dreams shine the best.
Methought upon a plain I stood,
  Where certain wondrous men, 'twas said,
With strange, miraculous power endued,
  Were coming each in turn to shed
His art's illusions o'er the sight
And call up miracles of light.
The sky above this lonely place,
  Was of that cold, uncertain hue,
The canvas wears ere, warmed apace,
  Its bright creation dawns to view.

But soon a glimmer from the east
  Proclaimed the first enchantments nigh;[1]
And as the feeble light increased,
  Strange figures moved across the sky,
With golden glories deckt and streaks
  Of gold among their garments' dyes;[2]
And life's resemblance tinged their cheeks,
  But naught of life was in their eyes;--
Like the fresh-painted Dead one meets,
Borne slow along Rome's mournful streets.

But soon these figures past away;
  And forms succeeded to their place
With less of gold in their array,
  But shining with more natural grace,
And all could see the charming wands
Had past into more gifted hands.
Among these visions there was one,[3]
Surpassing fair, on which the sun,
That instant risen, a beam let fall,
  Which thro' the dusky twilight trembled.
And reached at length the spot where all
  Those great magicians stood assembled.
And as they turned their heads to view
  The shining lustre, I could trace
The bright varieties it threw
  On each uplifted studying face:[4]
While many a voice with loud acclaim
Called forth, "Masaccio" as the name
Of him, the Enchanter, who had raised
This miracle on which all gazed.

'Twas daylight now--the sun had risen
  From out the dungeon of old Night.--
Like the Apostle from his prison
  Led by the Angel's hand of light;
And--as the fetters, when that ray
Of glory reached them, dropt away.[5]
So fled the clouds at touch of day!
Just then a bearded sage came forth,[6]
  Who oft in thoughtful dream would stand,
To trace upon the dusky earth
  Strange learned figures with his wand;
And oft he took the silver lute
  His little page behind him bore,
And waked such music as, when mute,
  Left in the soul a thirst for more!

Meanwhile his potent spells went on,
  And forms and faces that from out
A depth of shadow mildly shone
  Were in the soft air seen about.
Tho' thick as midnight stars they beamed,
Yet all like living sisters seemed,
So close in every point resembling
  Each other's beauties--from the eyes
Lucid as if thro' crystal trembling,
  Yet soft as if suffused with sighs,
To the long, fawn-like mouth, and chin,
  Lovelily tapering, less and less,
  Till by this very charm's excess,
Like virtue on the verge of sin,
  It touched the bounds of ugliness.
Here lookt as when they lived the shades
Of some of Arno's dark-eyed maids--
Such maids as should alone live on
In dreams thus when their charms are gone:
Some Mona Lisa on whose eyes
  A painter for whole years might gaze,[7]
Nor find in all his pallet's dyes
  One that could even approach their blaze!
Here float two spirit shapes,[8] the one,
With her white fingers to the sun
Outspread as if to ask his ray
Whether it e'er had chanced to play
On lilies half so fair as they!
This self-pleased nymph was Vanity--
And by her side another smiled,
  In form as beautiful as she,
But with that air subdued and mild,
  That still reserve of purity,
Which is to beauty like the haze
  Of evening to some sunny view,
Softening such charms as it displays
  And veiling others in that hue,
  Which fancy only can see thro'!
This phantom nymph, who could she be,
But the bright Spirit, Modesty?

Long did the learned enchanter stay
  To weave his spells and still there past,
As in the lantern's shifting play
Group after group in close array,
  Each fairer, grander, than the last.
But the great triumph of his power
  Was yet to come:--gradual and slow,
(As all that is ordained to tower
  Among the works of man must grow,)
The sacred vision stole to view,
  In that half light, half shadow shown,
Which gives to even the gayest hue
  A sobered, melancholy tone.
It was a vision of that last,[9]
Sorrowful night which Jesus past
With his disciples when he said
  Mournfully to them--"I shall be
"Betrayed by one who here hath fed
  "This night at the same board with me."
And tho' the Saviour in the dream
Spoke not these words, we saw them beam
Legibly in his eyes (so well
The great magician workt his spell),
And read in every thoughtful line
Imprinted on that brow divine.

The meek, the tender nature, grieved,
Not angered to be thus deceived--
Celestial love requited ill
For all its care, yet loving still--
Deep, deep regret that there should fall
  From man's deceit so foul a blight
Upon that parting hour--and all
  _His_ Spirit must have felt that night.
Who, soon to die for human-kind,
  Thought only, mid his mortal pain,
How many a soul was left behind
  For whom he died that death in vain!

Such was the heavenly scene--alas!
That scene so bright so soon should pass
But pictured on the humid air,
Its tints, ere long, grew languid there;[10]
And storms came on, that, cold and rough,
  Scattered its gentlest glories all--
As when the baffling winds blow off
  The hues that hang o'er Terni's fall,--
Till one by one the vision's beams
  Faded away and soon it fled.
To join those other vanisht dreams
  That now flit palely 'mong the dead,--
The shadows of those shades that go.
Around Oblivion's lake below!


[1] The paintings of those artists who were introduced into Venice and
Florence from Greece.

[2] Margaritone of Orezzo, who was a pupil and imitator of the Greeks, is
said to have invented this art of gilding the ornaments of pictures, a
practice which, though it gave way to a purer taste at the beginning of
the 16th century, was still occasionally used by many of the great
masters: as by Raphael in the ornaments of the Fornarina, and by Rubens
not unfrequently in glories and flames.

[3] The works of Masaccio.--For the character of this powerful and
original genius, see Sir Joshua Reynolds's twelfth discourse. His
celebrated frescoes are in the church of St. Pietro del Carmine, at
Florence.

[4] All the great artists studies, and many of them borrowed from
Masaccio. Several figures in the Cartoons of Raphael are taken, with but
little alteration, from his frescoes.

[5] "And a light shined in the prison ... and his chains fell off from his
hands."--_Acts_.

[6] Leonardo da Vinci.

[7] He is said to have been four years employed upon the portrait of this
fair Florentine, without being able, after all, to come up to his idea of
her beauty.

[8] Vanity and Modesty in the collection of Cardinal Fesch, at Rome. The
composition of the four hands here is rather awkward, but the picture,
altogether, is very delightful. There is a repetition of the subject in
the possession of Lucien Bonaparte.

[9] The Last Supper of Leonardo da Vinci, which is in the Refectory of the
Convent delle Grazie at Milan.

[10] Leonardo appears to have used a mixture of oil and varnish for this
picture, which alone, without the various other causes of its ruin, would
have prevented any long duration of its beauties. It is now almost
entirely effaced.






EXTRACT XV.

Rome.


_Mary Magdalen.--Her Story.--Numerous Pictures of her.--Correggio--Guido
--Raphael, etc.--Canova's two exquisite Statues.--The Somariva Magdalen.
--Chantrey's Admiration of Canova's Works_.


No wonder, MARY, that thy story
  Touches all hearts--for there we see thee.
The soul's corruption and its glory,
  Its death and life combine in thee.

From the first moment when we find
  Thy spirit haunted by a swarm
Of dark desires,--like demons shrined
  Unholily in that fair form,--
Till when by touch of Heaven set free,
  Thou camest, with those bright locks of gold
(So oft the gaze of BETHANY),
  And covering in their precious fold
Thy Saviour's feet didst shed such tears
As paid, each drop, the sins of years!--
Thence on thro' all thy course of love
  To Him, thy Heavenly Master,--Him
Whose bitter death-cup from above
  Had yet this cordial round the brim,
That woman's faith and love stood fast
And fearless by Him to the last:--
Till, oh! blest boon for truth like thine!
  Thou wert of all the chosen one,
Before whose eyes that Face Divine
  When risen from the dead first shone;
That thou might'st see how, like a cloud,
Had past away its mortal shroud,
And make that bright revealment known
To hearts less trusting than thy own.
All is affecting, cheering, grand;
  The kindliest record ever given,
Even under God's own kindly hand,
  Of what repentance wins from Heaven!

No wonder, MARY, that thy face,
  In all its touching light of tears,
Should meet us in each holy place,
  Where Man before his God appears,
Hopeless--were he not taught to see
All hope in Him who pardoned thee!
No wonder that the painter's skill
  Should oft have triumpht in the power
Of keeping thee all lovely still
  Even in thy sorrow's bitterest hour;
That soft CORREGGIO should diffuse
  His melting shadows round thy form;
That GUIDO'S pale, unearthly hues
  Should in portraying thee grow warm;
That all--from the ideal, grand,
Inimitable Roman hand,
Down to the small, enameling touch
  Of smooth CARLINO--should delight
In picturing her, "who loved so much,"
  And was, in spite of sin, so bright!

  But MARY, 'mong these bold essays
Of Genius and of Art to raise
A semblance of those weeping eyes--
  A vision worthy of the sphere
Thy faith has earned thee in the skies,
  And in the hearts of all men here,--
None e'er hath matched, in grief or grace,
CANOVA'S day-dream of thy face,
In those bright sculptured forms, more bright
With true expression's breathing light,
Than ever yet beneath the stroke
Of chisel into life awoke.
The one,[1] portraying what thou wert
  In thy first grief,--while yet the flower
Of those young beauties was unhurt
  By sorrow's slow, consuming power;
And mingling earth's seductive grace
  With heaven's subliming thoughts so well,
We doubt, while gazing, in _which_ place
  Such beauty was most formed to dwell!--
The other, as thou look'dst, when years
Of fasting, penitence and tears
Had worn thy frame;--and ne'er did Art
  With half such speaking power express
The ruin which a breaking heart
  Spreads by degrees o'er loveliness.
Those wasting arms, that keep the trace,
Even still, of all their youthful grace,
That loosened hair of which thy brow
Was once so proud,--neglected now!--
Those features even in fading worth
  The freshest bloom to others given,
And those sunk eyes now lost to earth
  But to the last still full of heaven!

Wonderful artist! praise, like mine--
  Tho' springing from a soul that feels
Deep worship of those works divine
  Where Genius all his light reveals--
How weak 'tis to the words that came
From him, thy peer in art and fame,[2]
Whom I have known, by day, by night,
Hang o'er thy marble with delight;
And while his lingering hand would steal
  O'er every grace the taper's rays[3]
Give thee with all the generous zeal
Such master spirits only feel,
  That best of fame, a rival's prize!


[1] This statue is one of the last works of Canova, and was not yet in
marble when I left Rome. The other, which seems to prove, in contradiction
to very high authority, that expression of the intensest kind is fully
within the sphere of sculpture, was executed many years ago, and is in the
possession of the Count Somariva at Paris.

[2] Chantrey.

[3] Canova always shows his fine statue, the Venere Vincitrice, by the
light of a small candle.






EXTRACT XVI.

Les Charmettes.


_A Visit to the house where Rousseau lived with Madame de Warrens.--
Their Menage.--Its Grossness.--Claude Anet.--Reverence with which the spot
is now visited.--Absurdity of this blind Devotion to Fame.--Feelings
excited by the Beauty and Seclusion of the Scene. Disturbed by its
Associations with Rousseau's History.--Impostures of Men of Genius.--Their
Power of mimicking all the best Feelings, Love, Independence, etc_.


Strange power of Genius, that can throw
Round all that's vicious, weak, and low,
Such magic lights, such rainbows dyes
As dazzle even the steadiest eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Tis worse than weak--'tis wrong, 'tis shame,
This mean prostration before Fame;
This casting down beneath the car
Of Idols, whatsoe'er they are,
Life's purest, holiest decencies,
To be careered o'er as they please.
No--give triumphant Genius all
For which his loftiest wish can call:
If he be worshipt, let it be
  For attributes, his noblest, first;
Not with that base idolatry
  Which sanctifies his last and worst.

  I may be cold;--may want that glow
Of high romance which bards should know;
That holy homage which is felt
In treading where the great have dwelt;
This reverence, whatsoe'er it be,
  I fear, I feel, I have it _not_:--
For here at this still hour, to me
  The charms of this delightful spot,
Its calm seclusion from the throng,
  From all the heart would fain forget,
This narrow valley and the song
  Of its small murmuring rivulet,
The flitting to and fro of birds,
Tranquil and tame as they were once
In Eden ere the startling words
  Of man disturbed their orisons,
Those little, shadowy paths that wind
Up the hillside, with fruit-trees lined
And lighted only by the breaks
The gay wind in the foliage makes,
Or vistas here and there that ope
  Thro' weeping willows, like the snatches
Of far-off scenes of light, which Hope
  Even tho' the shade of sadness catches!--
All this, which--could I once but lose
  The memory of those vulgar ties
Whose grossness all the heavenliest hues
  Of Genius can no more disguise
Than the sun's beams can do away
The filth of fens o'er which they play--
This scene which would have filled my heart
  With thoughts of all that happiest is;--
Of Love where self hath only part,
  As echoing back another's bliss;
Of solitude secure and sweet.
Beneath whose shade the Virtues meet.
Which while it shelters never chills
  Our sympathies with human woe,
But keeps them like sequestered rills
Purer and fresher in their flow;
Of happy days that share their beams
  'Twixt quiet mirth and wise employ;
Of tranquil nights that give in dreams
  The moonlight of the morning's joy!--
All this my heart could dwell on here,
But for those gross mementoes near;
Those sullying truths that cross the track
Of each sweet thought and drive them back
Full into all the mire and strife
And vanities of that man's life,
Who more than all that e'er have glowed
  With fancy's flame (and it was _his_,
In fullest warmth and radiance) showed
  What an impostor Genius is;
How with that strong, mimetic art
  Which forms its life and soul, it takes
All shapes of thought, all hues of heart,
  Nor feels itself one throb it wakes;
How like a gem its light may smile
  O'er the dark path by mortals trod,
Itself as mean a worm the while
  As crawls at midnight o'er the sod;
What gentle words and thoughts may fall
  From its false lip, what zeal to bless,
While home, friends, kindred, country, all,
  Lie waste beneath its selfishness;
How with the pencil hardly dry
  From coloring up such scenes of love
And beauty as make young hearts sigh
  And dream and think thro' heaven they rove,
They who can thus describe and move,
  The very workers of these charms,
Nor seek nor know a joy above
  Some Maman's or Theresa's arms!

How all in short that makes the boast
Of their false tongues they want the most;
And while with freedom on their lips,
  Sounding their timbrels, to set free
This bright world, laboring in the eclipse
  Of priestcraft and of slavery,--
They may themselves be slaves as low
  As ever Lord or Patron made
To blossom in his smile or grow
  Like stunted brushwood in his shade.
Out on the craft!--I'd rather be
  One of those hinds that round me tread,
With just enough of sense to see
  The noonday sun that's o'er his head,
Than thus with high-built genius curst,
  That hath no heart for its foundation,
Be all at once that's brightest, worst,
  Sublimest, meanest in creation!


  THE SYLPH'S BALL.


A sylph, as bright as ever sported
  Her figure thro' the fields of air,
By an old swarthy Gnome was courted.
  And, strange to say, he won the fair.

The annals of the oldest witch
  A pair so sorted could not show,
But how refuse?--the Gnome was rich,
  The Rothschild of the world below;

And Sylphs, like other pretty creatures,
  Are told, betimes, they must consider
Love as an auctioneer of features,
  Who knocks them down to the best bidder.

Home she was taken to his Mine--
  A Palace paved with diamonds all--
And, proud as Lady Gnome to shine,
  Sent out her tickets for a ball.

The _lower_ world of course was there,
  And all the best; but of the _upper_
The sprinkling was but shy and rare,--
A few old Sylphids who loved supper.

As none yet knew the wondrous Lamp
Of DAVY, that renowned Aladdin,
And the Gnome's Halls exhaled a damp
Which accidents from fire were had in;

The chambers were supplied with light
By many strange but safe devices;
Large fire-flies, such as shine at night
Among the Orient's flowers and spices;--

Musical flint-mills--swiftly played
 By elfin hands--that, flashing round,
Like certain fire-eyed minstrel maids,
Gave out at once both light and sound.

Bologna stones that drink the sun;
 And water from that Indian sea,
Whose waves at night like wildfire run--
Corked up in crystal carefully.

Glow-worms that round the tiny dishes
Like little light-houses, were set up;
And pretty phosphorescent fishes
 That by their own gay light were eat up.

'Mong the few guests from Ether came
That wicked Sylph whom Love we call--
My Lady knew him but by name,
 My Lord, her husband, not at all.

Some prudent Gnomes, 'tis said, apprised
That he was coming, and, no doubt
Alarmed about his torch, advised
 He should by all means be kept out.

But others disapproved this plan,
 And by his flame tho' somewhat frighted,
Thought Love too much a gentleman
In such a dangerous place to light it.

However, _there_ he was--and dancing
 With the fair Sylph, light as a feather;
They looked like two fresh sunbeams glancing
At daybreak down to earth together.

And all had gone off safe and well,
 But for that plaguy torch whose light,
Though not _yet_ kindled--who could tell
How soon, how devilishly, it _might_?

And so it chanced--which, in those dark
 And fireless halls was quite amazing;
Did we not know how small a spark
 Can set the torch of Love a-blazing.

Whether it came (when close entangled
 In the gay waltz) from her bright eyes,
Or from the _lucciole_, that spangled
 Her locks of jet--is all surmise;

But certain 'tis the ethereal girl
 _Did_ drop a spark at some odd turning,
Which by the waltz's windy whirl
 Was fanned up into actual burning.

Oh for that Lamp's metallic gauze,
 That curtain of protecting wire,
Which DAVY delicately draws
 Around illicit, dangerous fire!--

The wall he sets 'twixt Flame and Air,
  (Like that which barred young Thisbe's bliss,)
Thro' whose small holes this dangerous pair
  May see each other but not kiss.

At first the torch looked rather bluely,--
  A sign, they say, that no good boded--
Then quick the gas became unruly.
  And, crack! the ball-room all exploded.

Sylphs, gnomes, and fiddlers mixt together,
  With all their aunts, sons, cousins, nieces,
Like butterflies in stormy weather,
  Were blown--legs, wings, and tails--to pieces!

While, mid these victims of the torch,
  The Sylph, alas, too, bore her part--
Found lying with a livid scorch
  As if from lightning o'er her heart!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well done"--a laughing Goblin said--
  Escaping from this gaseous strife--
"'Tis not the _first_ time Love has made
  "A _blow-up_ in connubial life!"






REMONSTRANCE.


_After a Conversation with Lord John Russell, in which he had intimated
some Idea of giving up all political Pursuits. _


What! _thou_, with thy genius, thy youth, and thy name--
  Thou, born of a Russell--whose instinct to run
The accustomed career of thy sires, is the same
  As the eaglet's, to soar with his eyes on the sun!

Whose nobility comes to thee, stampt with a seal,
  Far, far more ennobling than monarch e'er set;
With the blood of thy race, offered up for the weal
  Of a nation that swears by that martyrdom yet!

Shalt _thou_ be faint-hearted and turn from the strife,
  From the mighty arena, where all that is grand
And devoted and pure and adorning in life,
  'Tis for high-thoughted spirits like thine to command?

Oh no, never dream it--while good men despair
  Between tyrants and traitors, and timid men bow,
Never think for an instant thy country can spare
  Such a light from her darkening horizon as thou.

With a spirit, as meek as the gentlest of those
  Who in life's sunny valley lie sheltered and warm;
Yet bold and heroic as ever yet rose
  To the top cliffs of Fortune and breasted her storm;

With an ardor for liberty fresh as in youth
  It first kindles the bard and gives life to his lyre;
Yet mellowed, even now, by that mildness of truth
  Which tempers but chills not the patriot fire;

With an eloquence--not like those rills from a height,
  Which sparkle and foam and in vapor are o'er;
But a current that works out its way into light
  Thro' the filtering recesses of thought and of lore.

Thus gifted, thou never canst sleep in the shade;
  If the stirrings of Genius, the music of fame,
And the charms of thy cause have not power to persuade,
  Yet think how to Freedom thou'rt pledged by thy Name.

Like the boughs of that laurel by Delphi's decree
  Set apart for the Fane and its service divine,
So the branches that spring from the old Russell tree
  Are by Liberty _claimed_ for the use of her Shrine.






MY BIRTH-DAY.


"My birth-day"--what a different sound
  That word had in my youthful ears!
And how, each time the day comes round,
  Less and less white its mark appears!

"When first our scanty years are told,
It seems like pastime to grow old;
And as Youth counts the shining links
  That Time around him binds so fast,
Pleased with the task, he little thinks
  How hard that chain will press at last.
Vain was the man, and false as vain,
  Who said--"were he ordained to run
"His long career of life again,
  "He would do all that he _had_ done."--
Ah, 'tis not thus the voice that dwells
  In sober birth-days speaks to me;
Far otherwise--of time it tells,
  Lavished unwisely, carelessly:
Of counsel mockt; of talents made
  Haply for high and pure designs,
But oft, like Israel's incense, laid
  Upon unholy, earthly shrines;
Of nursing many a wrong desire,
  Of wandering after Love too far,
And taking every meteor fire
  That crost my pathway, for his star.--
All this it tells, and, could I trace
  The imperfect picture o'er again.
With power to add, retouch, efface
  The lights and shades, the joy and pain,
How little of the past would stay!
How quickly all should melt away--
All--but that Freedom of the Mind
  Which hath been more than wealth to me;
Those friendships, in my boyhood twined,
  And kept till now unchangingly,
And that dear home, that saving ark,
  Where Love's true light at last I've found,
Cheering within, when all grows dark
  And comfortless and stormy round!






FANCY.


The more I've viewed this world, the more I've found,
That filled as 'tis with scenes and creatures rare,
Fancy commands within her own bright round
  A world of scenes and creatures far more fair.
Nor is it that her power can call up there
  A single charm, that's not from Nature won,--
No more than rainbows in their pride can wear
  A single tint unborrowed from the sun;
But 'tis the mental medium; it shines thro',
That lends to Beauty all its charm and hue;
As the same light that o'er the level lake
  One dull monotony of lustre flings,
Will, entering in the rounded raindrop, make
Colors as gay as those on angels' wings!






SONG.

FANNY, DEAREST.


Yes! had I leisure to sigh and mourn,
  Fanny dearest, for thee I'd sigh;
And every smile on my cheek should turn
  To tears when thou art nigh.
But between love and wine and sleep,
  So busy a life I live,
That even the time it would take to weep
  Is more than my heart can give.
Then wish me not to despair and pine,
  Fanny, dearest of all the dears!
The Love that's ordered to bathe in wine,
  Would be sure to take cold in tears.

Reflected bright in this heart of mine,
  Fanny dearest, thy image lies;
But ah! the mirror would cease to shine,
  If dimmed too often with sighs.
They lose the half of beauty's light,
  Who view it thro' sorrow's tear;
And 'tis but to see thee truly bright
  That I keep my eye-beams clear.
Then wait no longer till tears shall flow--

  Fanny, dearest! the hope is vain;
If sunshine cannot dissolve thy snow,
  I shall never attempt it with rain.



  TRANSLATIONS FROM CATULLUS.

  Sweet Sirmio! thou, the very eye
  Of all peninsulas and isles,
That in our lakes of silver lie,
  Or sleep enwreathed by Neptune's smiles--

How gladly back to thee I fly!
  Still doubting, asking--_can_ it be
That I have left Bithynia's sky,
  And gaze in safety upon thee?

Oh! what is happier than to find
  Our hearts at ease, our perils past;
When, anxious long, the lightened mind
  Lays down its load of care at last:

When tired with toil o'er land and deep,
  Again we tread the welcome floor
Of our own home, and sink to sleep
  On the long-wished-for bed once more.

This, this it is that pays alone
  The ills of all life's former track.--
Shine out, my beautiful, my own
  Sweet Sirmio, greet thy master back.

And thou, fair Lake, whose water quaffs
  The light of heaven like Lydia's sea,
Rejoice, rejoice--let all that laughs
  Abroad, at home, laugh out for me!


A SPECULATION.


Of all speculations the market holds forth,
  The best that I know for a lover of pelf,
Is to buy Marcus up, at the price he is worth,
  And then sell him at that which he sets on himself.






TO MY MOTHER.

WRITTEN IN A POCKET BOOK, 1822.


They tell us of an Indian tree,
  Which, howsoe'er the sun and sky
May tempt its boughs to wander free,
  And shoot and blossom wide and high,
Far better loves to bend its arms
  Downward again to that dear earth,
From which the life that, fills and warms
  Its grateful being, first had birth.
'Tis thus, tho' wooed by flattering friends,
  And fed with fame (_if_ fame it be)
This heart, my own dear mother, bends,
  With love's true instinct, back to thee!






LOVE AND HYMEN.


Love had a fever--ne'er could close
  His little eyes till day was breaking;
And wild and strange enough, Heaven knows,
  The things he raved about while waking.

To let him pine so were a sin;--
  One to whom all the world's a debtor--
So Doctor Hymen was called in,
  And Love that night slept rather better.

Next day the case gave further hope yet,
  Tho' still some ugly fever latent;--
"Dose, as before"--a gentle opiate.
  For which old Hymen has a patent.

After a month of daily call,
  So fast the dose went on restoring,
That Love, who first ne'er slept at all,
  Now took, the rogue! to downright snoring.






LINES ON THE ENTRY OF THE AUSTRIANS INTO NAPLES, 1821.


    _carbone notati_.


Ay--down to the dust with them, slaves as they are,
  From this hour let the blood in their dastardly veins,
That shrunk at the first touch of Liberty's war,
  Be wasted for tyrants, or stagnate in chains.

On, on like a cloud, thro' their beautiful vales,
  Ye locusts of tyranny, blasting them o'er--
Fill, fill up their wide sunny waters, ye sails
  From each slave-mart of Europe and shadow their shore!

Let their fate be a mock-word--let men of all lands
  Laugh out with a scorn that shall ring to the poles,
When each sword that the cowards let fall from their hands
  Shall be forged into fetters to enter their souls.

And deep, and more deep, as the iron is driven,
  Base slaves! let the whet of their agony be,
To think--as the Doomed often think of that heaven
  They had once within reach--that they _might_ have been free.

Oh shame! when there was not a bosom whose heat
  Ever rose 'bove the _zero_ of Castlereagh's heart.
That did not, like echo, your war-hymn repeat,
  And send all its prayers with your Liberty's start;

When the world stood in hope--when a spirit that breathed
  The fresh air of the olden time whispered about;
And the swords of all Italy, halfway unsheathed,
  But waited one conquering cry to flash out!

When around you the shades of your Mighty in fame,
  FILICAJAS and PETRARCHS, seemed bursting to view,
And their words and their warnings, like tongues of bright flame
  Over Freedom's apostles, fell kindling on you!

Oh shame! that in such a proud moment of life
  Worth the history of ages, when, had you but hurled
One bolt at your tyrant invader, that strife
  Between freemen and tyrants had spread thro' the world--

That then--oh! disgrace upon manhood--even then,
  You should falter, should cling to your pitiful breath;
Cower down into beasts, when you might have stood men,
  And prefer the slave's life of prostration to death.

It is strange, it is dreadful:--shout, Tyranny, shout
  Thro' your dungeons and palaces, "Freedom is o'er;"--
If there lingers one spark of her light, tread it out,
  And return to your empire of darkness once more.

For if _such_ are the braggarts that claim to be free,
  Come, Despot of Russia, thy feet let me kiss;
Far nobler to live the brute bondman of thee,
  Than to sully even chains by a struggle like this!






SCEPTICISM.


Ere Psyche drank the cup that shed
  Immortal Life into her soul,
Some evil spirit poured, 'tis said,
  One drop of Doubt into the bowl--

Which, mingling darkly with the stream,
  To Psyche's lips--she knew not why--
Made even that blessed nectar seem
  As tho' its sweetness soon would die.

Oft, in the very arms of Love,
  A chill came o'er her heart--a fear
That Death might, even yet, remove
  Her spirit from that happy sphere.

"Those sunny ringlets," she exclaimed.
  Twining them round her snowy fingers;
"That forehead, where a light unnamed,
  "Unknown on earth, for ever lingers;

"Those lips, thro' which I feel the breath
  "Of Heaven itself, whene'er they sever--
"Say, are they mine, beyond all death,
  "My own, hereafter, and for ever?

"Smile not--I know that starry brow,
  "Those ringlets, and bright lips of thine,
"Will always shine, as they do now--
  "But shall _I_ live to see them shine?"

In vain did Love say, "Turn thine eyes
  "On all that sparkles round thee here--
"Thou'rt now in heaven where nothing dies,
  "And in these arms--what _canst_ thou fear?"

In vain--the fatal drop, that stole
  Into that cup's immortal treasure,
Had lodged its bitter near her soul.
  And gave a tinge to every pleasure.

And, tho' there ne'er was transport given
  Like Psyche's with that radiant boy,
Here is the only face in heaven,
  That wears a cloud amid its joy.






A JOKE VERSIFIED.


"Come, come," said Tom's father, "at your time of life,
  "There's no longer excuse for thus playing the rake--
"It is time you should think, boy, of taking a wife"--
  "Why, so it is, father--whose wife shall I take?"






ON THE DEATH OF A FRIEND.


Pure as the mantle, which, o'er him who stood
  By Jordan's stream, descended from the sky,
Is that remembrance which the wise and good
  Leave in the hearts that love them, when they die.

So pure, so precious shall the memory be,
Bequeathed, in dying, to our souls by thee--
So shall the love we bore thee, cherisht warm
  Within our souls thro' grief and pain and strife,
Be, like Elisha's cruse, a holy charm,
  Wherewith to "heal the waters" of this life!



IMITATION.

FROM THE FRENCH.


With women and apples both Paris and Adam
  Made mischief enough in their day:--
God be praised that the fate of mankind, my dear Madam,
  Depends not on _us_, the same way.
For, weak as I am with temptation to grapple,
  The world would have doubly to rue thee:

Like Adam, I'd gladly take _from_ thee the apple,
  Like Paris, at once give it _to_ thee.




FRAGMENT OF A CHARACTER.


Here lies Factotum Ned at last;
  Long as he breathed the vital air,
Nothing throughout all Europe past
  In which Ned hadn't some small share.

Whoe'er was _in_, whoe'er was _out_,
  Whatever statesmen did or said,
If not exactly brought about,
  'Twas all, at least, contrived by Ned.

With Nap, if Russia went to war,
  'Twas owing, under Providence,
To certain hints Ned gave the Tsar--
  (Vide his pamphlet--price, sixpence.)

If France was beat at Waterloo--
  As all but Frenchmen think she was--
To Ned, as Wellington well knew,
  Was owing half that day's applause.

Then for his news--no envoy's bag
  E'er past so many secrets thro' it;
Scarcely a telegraph could wag
  Its wooden finger, but Ned knew it.

Such tales he had of foreign plots,
  With foreign names, one's ear to buzz in!
From Russia, _shefs_ and _ofs_ in lots,
  From Poland, _owskis_ by the dozen.

When George, alarmed for England's creed,
  Turned out the last Whig ministry,
And men asked--who advised the deed?
  Ned modestly confest 'twas he.

For tho', by some unlucky miss,
  He had not downright _seen_ the King,
He sent such hints thro' Viscount _This_,
  To Marquis _That_, as clenched the thing.

The same it was in science, arts,
  The Drama, Books, MS. and printed--
Kean learned from Ned his cleverest parts,
  And Scott's last work by him was hinted.

Childe Harold in the proofs he read,
  And, here and there infused some soul in't--
Nay, Davy's Lamp, till seen by Ned,
  Had--odd enough--an awkward hole in't.

'Twas thus, all-doing and all-knowing,
  Wit, statesman, boxer, chymist, singer,
Whatever was the best pie going,
  In _that_ Ned--trust him--had his finger.

       *        *        *        *        *



COUNTRY DANCE AND QUADRILLE.


One night the nymph called country dance--
  (Whom folks, of late, have used so ill,
Preferring a coquette from France,
  That mincing thing, _Mamselle_ quadrille)--

Having been chased from London down
  To that most humble haunt of all
She used to grace--a Country Town--
  Went smiling to the New-Year's Ball.

"Here, here, at least," she cried, tho' driven
  "From London's gay and shining tracks--
"Tho', like a Peri cast from heaven,
  "I've lost, for ever lost, Almack's--

"Tho' not a London Miss alive
  "Would now for her acquaintance own me;
"And spinsters, even, of forty-five,
  "Upon their honors ne'er have known me;

"Here, here, at least, I triumph still,
  "And--spite of some few dandy Lancers.
"Who vainly try to preach Quadrille--
  "See naught but _true-blue_ Country Dancers,

"Here still I reign, and, fresh in charms,
  "My throne, like Magna Charta, raise
"'Mong sturdy, free-born legs and arms,
  "That scorn the threatened _chaine anglaise_."

'Twas thus she said, as mid the din
  Of footmen, and the town sedan,
She lighted at the King's Head Inn,
  And up the stairs triumphant ran.

The Squires and their Squiresses all,
  With young Squirinas, just _come out_,
And my Lord's daughters from the Hall,
  (Quadrillers in their hearts no doubt,)--

All these, as light she tript upstairs,
  Were in the cloak-room seen assembling--
When, hark! some new outlandish airs,
  From the First Fiddle, set her trembling.

She stops--she listens--_can_ it be?
  Alas, in vain her ears would 'scape it--
It _is "Di tanti palpiti"_
  As plain as English bow can scrape it.

"Courage!" however--in she goes,
  With her best, sweeping country grace;
When, ah too true, her worst of foes,
  Quadrille, there meets her, face to face.

Oh for the lyre, or violin,
  Or kit of that gay Muse, Terpsichore,
To sing the rage these nymphs were in,
  Their looks and language, airs and trickery.

There stood Quadrille, with cat-like face
  (The beau-ideal of French beauty),
A band-box thing, all art and lace
  Down from her nose-tip to her shoe-tie.

Her flounces, fresh from _Victorine_--
  From _Hippolyte_, her rouge and hair--
Her poetry, from _Lamartine_--
  Her morals, from--the Lord knows where.

And, when she danced--so slidingly,
  So near the ground she plied her art,
You'd swear her mother-earth and she
  Had made a compact ne'er to part.

Her face too, all the while, sedate,
  No signs of life or motion showing.
Like a bright _pendule's_ dial-plate--
  So still, you'd hardly think 'twas _going_.

Full fronting her stood Country Dance--
  A fresh, frank nymph, whom you would know
For English, at a single glance--
  English all o'er, from top to toe.

A little _gauche_, 'tis fair to own,
  And rather given to skips and bounces;
Endangering thereby many a gown,
  And playing, oft, the devil with flounces.

Unlike _Mamselle_--who would prefer
  (As morally a lesser ill)
A thousand flaws of character,
  To one vile rumple of a frill.

No rouge did She of Albion wear;
  Let her but run that two-heat race
She calls a _Set_, not Dian e'er
  Came rosier from the woodland chase.

Such was the nymph, whose soul had in't
  Such anger now--whose eyes of blue
(Eyes of that bright, victorious tint,
  Which English maids call "Waterloo")--

Like summer lightnings, in the dusk
  Of a warm evening, flashing broke.
While--to the tune of "Money Musk,"[1]
  Which struck up now--she proudly spoke--

"Heard you that strain--that joyous strain?
  "'Twas such as England loved to hear,
"Ere thou and all thy frippery train,
  "Corrupted both her foot and ear--

"Ere Waltz, that rake from foreign lands,
  "Presumed, in sight of all beholders,
"To lay his rude, licentious hands
  "On virtuous English backs and shoulders--

"Ere times and morals both grew bad,
  "And, yet unfleeced by funding block-heads,
"Happy John Bull not only _had_,
  "But danced to, 'Money in both pockets.'

"Alas, the change!--Oh, Londonderry,
  "Where is the land could 'scape disasters,
"With _such_ a Foreign Secretary,
  "Aided by Foreign Dancing Masters?

"Woe to ye, men of ships and shops!
  "Rulers of day-books and of waves!
"Quadrilled, on one side, into fops,
  "And drilled, on t'other, into slaves!

"Ye, too, ye lovely victims, seen,
  "Like pigeons, trussed for exhibition,
"With elbows, _à la crapaudine_,
  "And feet, in--God knows what position;

"Hemmed in by watchful chaperons,
  "Inspectors of your airs and graces,
"Who intercept all whispered tones,
  "And read your telegraphic faces;

"Unable with the youth adored,
  "In that grim _cordon_ of Mammas,
"To interchange one tender word,
  "Tho' whispered but in _queue-de-chats_.

"Ah did you know how blest we ranged,
  "Ere vile Quadrille usurpt the fiddle--
"What looks in _setting_ were exchanged,
  "What tender words in _down the middle_;

"How many a couple, like the wind,
  "Which nothing in its course controls,
Left time and chaperons far behind,
  "And gave a loose to legs and souls;

How matrimony throve--ere stopt
  "By this cold, silent, foot-coquetting--
"How charmingly one's partner propt
"The important question in _poussetteing_.

"While now, alas--no sly advances--
  "No marriage hints--all goes on badly--
"'Twixt Parson Malthus and French Dances,
  "We, girls, are at a discount sadly.

"Sir William Scott (now Baron Stowell)
  "Declares not half so much is made
"By Licences--and he must know well--
  "Since vile Quadrilling spoiled the trade."

She ceased--tears fell from every Miss--
  She now had touched the true pathetic:--
One such authentic fact as this,
  Is worth whole volumes theoretic.

Instant the cry was "Country Dance!"
  And the maid saw with brightening face,
The Steward of the night advance,
  And lead her to her birthright place.

The fiddles, which awhile had ceased,
  Now tuned again their summons sweet,
And, for one happy night, at least,
  Old England's triumph was complete.


[1] An old English country dance.




GENIUS AND CRITICISM.


    _scripsit quidem fata, sed sequitur_.
    SENECA.


Of old, the Sultan Genius reigned,
  As Nature meant, supreme alone;
With mind unchekt, and hands unchained,
  His views, his conquests were his own.

But power like his, that digs its grave
  With its own sceptre, could not last;
So Genius' self became the slave
  Of laws that Genius' self had past.

As Jove, who forged the chain of Fate,
  Was, ever after, doomed to wear it:
His nods, his struggles all too late--
  "_Qui semel jussit, semper paret_."

To check young Genius' proud career,
  The slaves who now his throne invaded,
Made Criticism his prime Vizir,
  And from that hour his glories faded.

Tied down in Legislation's school,
  Afraid of even his own ambition,
His very victories were by rule,
  And he was great but by permission.

His most heroic deeds--the same,
  That dazzled, when spontaneous actions--
Now, done by law, seemed cold and tame,
  And shorn of all their first attractions.

If he but stirred to take the air,
  Instant, the Vizir's Council sat--
"Good Lord, your Highness can't go there--
"Bless me, your Highness can't do that."

If, loving pomp, he chose to buy
  Rich jewels for his diadem,
"The taste was bad, the price was high--
  "A flower were simpler than a gem."

To please them if he took to flowers--
  "What trifling, what unmeaning things!
"Fit for a woman's toilet hours,
  "But not at all the style for Kings."

If, fond of his domestic sphere,
  He played no more the rambling comet--
"A dull, good sort of man, 'twas clear,
  "But, as for great or brave, far from it."

Did he then look o'er distant oceans,
  For realms more worthy to enthrone him?--
"Saint Aristotle, what wild notions!
  "Serve a '_ne exeat regno_' on him."

At length, their last and worst to do,
They round him placed a guard of watchmen,
Reviewers, knaves in brown, or blue
Turned up with yellow--chiefly Scotchmen;

To dog his footsteps all about
  Like those in Longwood's prison grounds,
Who at Napoleon's heels rode out,
  For fear the Conqueror should break bounds.

Oh for some Champion of his power,
  Some _Ultra_ spirit, to set free,
As erst in Shakespeare's sovereign hour,
  The thunders of his Royalty!--

To vindicate his ancient line,
  The first, the true, the only one,
Of Right eternal and divine,
  That rules beneath the blessed sun.



SONG OF THE POCO-CURANTE SOCIETY.


    _haud curat Hippoclides_.
    ERASM. _Adag_.


To those we love we've drank tonight;
  But now attend and stare not,
While I the ampler list recite
  Of those for whom WE CARE NOT.

For royal men, howe'er they frown,
  If on their fronts they bear not
That noblest gem that decks a crown,
  The People's Love--WE CARE NOT.

For slavish men who bend beneath
  A despot yoke, yet dare not
Pronounce the will whose very breath
  Would rend its links--WE CARE NOT.

For priestly men who covet sway
  And wealth, tho' they declare not;
Who point, like finger-posts, the way
  They never go--WE CARE NOT.

For martial men who on their sword,
  Howe'er it conquers, wear not
The pledges of a soldier's word,
  Redeemed and pure--WE CARE NOT.

For legal men who plead for wrong.
  And, tho' to lies they swear not,
Are hardly better than the throng
  Of those who do--WE CARE NOT.

For courtly men who feed upon
  The land, like grubs, and spare not
The smallest leaf where they can sun
  Their crawling limbs--WE CARE NOT.

For wealthy men who keep their mines
  In darkness hid, and share not
The paltry ore with him who pines
  In honest want--WE CARE NOT.

For prudent men who hold the power
  Of Love aloof, and bare not
Their hearts in any guardless hour
  To Beauty's shaft--WE CARE NOT.

For all, in short, on land or sea,
  In camp or court, who _are_ not,
Who never _were_, or e'er _will_ be
  Good men and true--WE CARE NOT.






