Come o'er the sea,
    Maiden, with me,
  Mine thro' sunshine, storm, and snows;
    Seasons may roll,
    But the true soul
  Burns the same, where'er it goes.
Let fate frown on, so we love and part not;
'Tis life where _thou_ art, 'tis death where thou art not.
    Then come o'er the sea,
    Maiden, with me,
  Come wherever the wild wind blows;
    Seasons may roll,
    But the true soul
  Burns the same, where'er it goes.

    Was not the sea
    Made for the Free,
  Land for courts and chains alone?
    Here we are slaves,
    But, on the waves,
  Love and Liberty's all our own.
No eye to watch, and no tongue to wound us,
All earth forgot, and all heaven around us--
    Then come o'er the sea,
    Maiden, with me,
  Mine thro' sunshine, storm, and snows;
    Seasons may roll,
    But the true soul
  Burns the same, where'er it goes.


  Come, rest in this bosom, my own stricken deer,
Tho' the herd have fled from thee, thy home is still here;
Here still is the smile, that no cloud can o'ercast,
And a heart and a hand all thy own to the last.

Oh! what was love made for, if 'tis not the same
Thro' joy and thro' torment, thro' glory and shame?
I know not, I ask not, if guilt's in that heart,
I but know that I love thee, whatever thou art.

Thou hast called me thy Angel in moments of bliss,
And thy Angel I'll be, mid the horrors of this,--
Thro' the furnace, unshrinking, thy steps to pursue,
And shield thee, and save thee,--or perish there too!


Dear Harp of my Country! in darkness I found thee,
  The cold chain of silence had hung o'er thee long,[1]
When proudly, my own Island Harp, I unbound thee,
  And gave all thy chords to light, freedom, and song!
The warm lay of love and the light note of gladness
  Have wakened thy fondest, thy liveliest thrill;
But, so oft hast thou echoed the deep sigh of sadness,
  That even in thy mirth it will steal from thee still.
Dear Harp of my country! farewell to thy numbers,
  This sweet wreath of song is the last we shall twine!
Go, sleep with the sunshine of Fame on thy slumbers,
  Till touched by some hand less unworthy than mine;
If the pulse of the patriot, soldier, or lover,
  Have throbbed at our lay, 'tis thy glory alone;
I was _but_ as the wind, passing heedlessly over,
  And all the wild sweetness I waked was thy own.


  Fill the bumper fair!
  Every drop we sprinkle
O'er the brow of Care
  Smooths away a wrinkle.
Wit's electric flame
  Ne'er so swiftly passes,
As when thro' the frame
  It shoots from brimming glasses.
Fill the bumper fair!
  Every drop we sprinkle
O'er the brow of Care
  Smooths away a wrinkle.

Sages can, they say,
  Grasp the lightning's pinions,
And bring down its ray
  From the starred dominions:--
So we, Sages, sit,
  And, mid bumpers brightening,
From the Heaven of Wit
  Draw down all its lightning.

Wouldst thou know what first
  Made our souls inherit
This ennobling thirst
  For wine's celestial spirit?
It chanced upon that day,
  When, as bards inform us,
Prometheus stole away
  The living fires that warm us:

The careless Youth, when up
  To Glory's fount aspiring,
Took nor urn nor cup
  To hide the pilfered fire in.--
But oh his joy, when, round
  The halls of Heaven spying,
Among the stars he found
  A bowl of Bacchus lying!

Some drops were in the bowl,
  Remains of last night's pleasure,
With which the Sparks of Soul
  Mixt their burning treasure.
Hence the goblet's shower
  Hath such spells to win us;
Hence its mighty power
  O'er that flame within us.
Fill the bumper fair!
  Every drop we sprinkle
O'er the brow of Care
  Smooths away a wrinkle.


  Has sorrow thy young days shaded,
  As clouds o'er the morning fleet?
Too fast have those young days faded,
  That, even in sorrow, were sweet?
Does Time with his cold wing wither
  Each feeling that once was dear?--
Then, child of misfortune, come hither,
  I'll weep with thee, tear for tear.

Has love to that soul, so tender,
  Been like our Lagenian mine,[1]
Where sparkles of golden splendor
  All over the surface shine--
But, if in pursuit we go deeper,
  Allured by the gleam that shone,
Ah! false as the dream of the sleeper,
  Like Love, the bright ore is gone.

Has Hope, like the bird in the story,[2]
  That flitted from tree to tree
With the talisman's glittering glory--
  Has Hope been that bird to thee?
On branch after branch alighting,
  The gem did she still display,
And, when nearest and most inviting.
  Then waft the fair gem away?

If thus the young hours have fleeted,
  When sorrow itself looked bright;
If thus the fair hope hath cheated,
  That led thee along so light;
If thus the cold world now wither
  Each feeling that once was dear:--
Come, child of misfortune, come hither,
  I'll weep with thee, tear for tear.


  I saw from the beach, when the morning was shining,
  A bark o'er the waters move gloriously on;
I came when the sun o'er that beach was declining,
  The bark was still there, but the waters were gone.

And such is the fate of our life's early promise,
  So passing the spring-tide of joy we have known;
Each wave, that we danced on at morning, ebbs from us,
  And leaves us, at eve, on the bleak shore alone.

Ne'er tell me of glories, serenely adorning
  The close of our day, the calm eve of our night;--
Give me back, give me back the wild freshness of Morning,
  Her clouds and her tears are worth Evening's best light.

Oh, who would not welcome that moment's returning,
  When passion first waked a new life thro' his frame,
And his soul, like the wood, that grows precious in burning,
  Gave out all its sweets to love's exquisite flame.


  No, not more welcome the fairy numbers
  Of music fall on the sleeper's ear,
When half-awaking from fearful slumbers,
  He thinks the full choir of heaven is near,--
Than came that voice, when, all forsaken.
  This heart long had sleeping lain,
Nor thought its cold pulse would ever waken
  To such benign, blessed sounds again.

Sweet voice of comfort! 'twas like the stealing
  Of summer wind thro' some wreathed shell--
Each secret winding, each inmost feeling
  Of my soul echoed to its spell.
'Twas whispered balm--'twas sunshine spoken!--
  I'd live years of grief and pain
To have my long sleep of sorrow broken
  By such benign, blessed sounds again.


  Oh, where's the slave so lowly,
Condemned to chains unholy,
  Who, could he burst
  His bonds at first,
Would pine beneath them slowly?
What soul, whose wrongs degrade it,
Would wait till time decayed it,
  When thus its wing
  At once may spring
To the throne of Him who made it?

Farewell, Erin.--farewell, all,
Who live to weep our fall!

Less dear the laurel growing,
Alive, untouched and blowing,
  Than that, whose braid
  Is plucked to shade
The brows with victory glowing
We tread the land that bore us,
Her green flag glitters o'er us,
  The friends we've tried
  Are by our side,
And the foe we hate before us.

Farewell, Erin,--farewell, all,
Who live to weep our fall!


The time I've lost in wooing,
In watching and pursuing
  The light, that lies
  In woman's eyes,
Has been my heart's undoing.
Tho' Wisdom oft has sought me,
I scorned the lore she brought me,
  My only books
  Were woman's looks,
And folly's all they've taught me.

Her smile when Beauty granted,
I hung with gaze enchanted,
  Like him the Sprite,[1]
  Whom maids by night
Oft meet in glen that's haunted.
Like him, too, Beauty won me,
But while her eyes were on me,
  If once their ray
  Was turned away,
O! winds could not outrun me.

And are those follies going?
And is my proud heart growing
  Too cold or wise
  For brilliant eyes
Again to set it glowing?
No, vain, alas! the endeavor
From bonds so sweet to sever;
  Poor Wisdom's chance
  Against a glance
Is now as weak as ever.


'Tis gone, and for ever, the light we saw breaking,
  Like Heaven's first dawn o'er the sleep of the dead--
When Man, from the slumber of ages awaking,
  Looked upward, and blest the pure ray, ere it fled.
'Tis gone, and the gleams it has left of its burning
But deepen the long night of bondage and mourning,
That dark o'er the kingdoms of earth is returning,
  And darkest of all, hapless Erin, o'er thee.

For high was thy hope, when those glories were darting
  Around thee, thro' all the gross clouds of the world;
When Truth, from her fetters indignantly starting,
  At once, like a Sun-burst, her banner unfurled.[1]
Oh! never shall earth see a moment so splendid!
Then, then--had one Hymn of Deliverance blended
The tongues of all nations--how sweet had ascended
  The first note of Liberty, Erin, from thee!

But, shame on those tyrants, who envied the blessing!
  And shame on the light race, unworthy its good,
Who, at Death's reeking altar, like furies, caressing
  The young hope of Freedom, baptized it in blood.
Then vanished for ever that fair, sunny vision,
Which, spite of the slavish, the cold heart's derision,
Shall long be remembered, pure, bright, and elysian,
  As first it arose, my lost Erin, on thee.


  When first I met thee, warm and young,
  There shone such truth about thee.
And on thy lip such promise hung,
  I did not dare to doubt thee.
I saw the change, yet still relied,
  Still clung with hope the fonder,
And thought, tho' false to all beside,
  From me thou couldst not wander.
    But go, deceiver! go,
      The heart, whose hopes could make it
    Trust one so false, so low,
      Deserves that thou shouldst break it.

When every tongue thy follies named,
  I fled the unwelcome story;
Or found, in even the faults they blamed,
  Some gleams of future glory.
_I_ still was true, when nearer friends
  Conspired to wrong, to slight thee;
The heart that now thy falsehood rends,
  Would then have bled to right thee,
    But go, deceiver! go,--
      Some day, perhaps, thou'lt waken
    From pleasure's dream, to know
      The grief of hearts forsaken.

Even now, tho' youth its bloom has shed,
  No lights of age adorn thee:
The few, who loved thee once, have fled,
  And they who flatter scorn thee.
Thy midnight cup is pledged to slaves,
  No genial ties enwreath it;
The smiling there, like light on graves,
  Has rank cold hearts beneath it.
    Go--go--tho' worlds were thine,
      I would not now surrender
    One taintless tear of mine
      For all thy guilty splendor!

And days may come, thou false one! yet,
  When even those ties shall sever;
When thou wilt call, with vain regret,
  On her thou'st lost for ever;
On her who, in thy fortune's fall,
  With smiles had still received thee,
And gladly died to prove thee all
  Her fancy first believed thee.
    Go--go--'tis vain to curse,
      'Tis weakness to upbraid thee;
    Hate cannot wish thee worse
      Than guilt and shame have made thee.


      While History's Muse the memorial was keeping
  Of all that the dark hand of Destiny weaves,
Beside her the Genius of Erin stood weeping,
  For hers was the story that blotted the leaves.
But oh! how the tear in her eyelids grew bright,
When, after whole pages of sorrow and shame,
    She saw History write,
    With a pencil of light
That illumed the whole volume, her Wellington's name.

"Hail, Star of my Isle!" said the Spirit, all sparkling
  With beams, such as break from her own dewy skies--
"Thro' ages of sorrow, deserted and darkling,
  "I've watched for some glory like thine to arise.
"For, tho' heroes I've numbered, unblest was their lot,
"And unhallowed they sleep in the crossways of Fame;--
    "But oh! there is not
    "One dishonoring blot
"On the wreath that encircles my Wellington's name.

"Yet still the last crown of thy toils is remaining,
  "The grandest, the purest, even _thou_ hast yet known;
"Tho' proud was thy task, other nations unchaining,
  "Far prouder to heal the deep wounds of thy own.
"At the foot of that throne, for whose weal thou hast stood,
"Go, plead for the land that first cradled thy fame,
    "And, bright o'er the flood
    "Of her tears and her blood,
"Let the rainbow of Hope be her Wellington's name!"