Down in the valley come meet me to-night,
  And I'll tell you your fortune truly
As ever 'twas told, by the new-moon's light,
  To a young maiden, shining as newly.

But, for the world, let no one be nigh,
  Lest haply the stars should deceive me;
Such secrets between you and me and the sky
  Should never go farther, believe me.

If at that hour the heavens be not dim,
  My science shall call up before you
A male apparition,--the image of him
  Whose destiny 'tis to adore you.

And if to that phantom you'll be kind,
  So fondly around you he'll hover,
You'll hardly, my dear, any difference find
  'Twixt him and a true living lover.

Down at your feet, in the pale moonlight,
  He'll kneel, with a warmth of devotion--
An ardor, of which such an innocent sprite
  You'd scarcely believe had a notion.

What other thoughts and events may arise,
  As in destiny's book I've not seen them,
Must only be left to the stars and your eyes
  To settle, ere morning, between them.


  Drink of this cup;--you'll find there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.
Would you forget the dark world we are in,
  Just taste of the bubble that gleams on the top of it;
But would you rise above earth, till akin
  To Immortals themselves, you must drain every drop of it;
Send round the cup--for oh there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.

Never was philter formed with such power
  To charm and bewilder as this we are quaffing;
Its magic began when, in Autumn's rich hour,
  A harvest of gold in the fields it stood laughing.
There having, by Nature's enchantment, been filled
  With the balm and the bloom of her kindliest weather,
This wonderful juice from its core was distilled
  To enliven such hearts as are here brought together.
Then drink of the cup--you'll find there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.

And tho' perhaps--but breathe it to no one--
  Like liquor the witch brews at midnight so awful,
This philter in secret was first taught to flow on,
  Yet 'tisn't less potent for being unlawful.
And, even tho' it taste of the smoke of that flame,
  Which in silence extracted its virtue forbidden--
Fill up--there's a fire in some hearts I could name,
  Which may work too its charm, tho' as lawless and hidden.
So drink of the cup--for oh there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.


  How sweet the answer Echo makes
  To music at night,
When, roused by lute or horn, she wakes,
And far away, o'er lawns and lakes,
  Goes answering light.

Yet Love hath echoes truer far,
  And far more sweet,
Than e'er beneath the moonlight star,
Of horn or lute, or soft guitar,
  The songs repeat.

'Tis when the sigh, in youth sincere,
  And only then,--
The sigh that's breath'd for one to hear,
Is by that one, that only dear,
  Breathed back again!


  Ne'er ask the hour--what is it to us
  How Time deals out his treasures?
The golden moments lent us thus,
  Are not _his_ coin, but Pleasure's.
If counting them o'er could add to their blisses,
  I'd number each glorious second:
But moments of joy are, like Lesbia's kisses,
  Too quick and sweet to be reckoned.
Then fill the cup--what is it to us
  How time his circle measures?
The fairy hours we call up thus,
  Obey no wand but Pleasure's.

Young Joy ne'er thought of counting hours,
  Till Care, one summer's morning,
Set up, among his smiling flowers,
  A dial, by way of warning.
But Joy loved better to gaze on the sun,
  As long as its light was glowing,
Than to watch with old Care how the shadows stole on,
  And how fast that light was going.
So fill the cup--what is it to us
  How Time his circle measures?
The fairy hours we call up thus,
  Obey no wand but Pleasure's.


  Of all the fair months, that round the sun
In light-linked dance their circles run,
  Sweet May, shine thou for me;
For still, when thy earliest beams arise,
That youth, who beneath the blue lake lies,
  Sweet May, returns to me.

Of all the bright haunts, where daylight leaves
Its lingering smile on golden eyes,
  Fair Lake, thou'rt dearest to me;
For when the last April sun grows dim,
Thy Naïads prepare his steed[1] for him
  Who dwells, bright Lake, in thee.

Of all the proud steeds, that ever bore
Young plumed Chiefs on sea or shore,
  White Steed, most joy to thee;
Who still, with the first young glance of spring,
From under that glorious lake dost bring
  My love, my chief, to me.

While, white as the sail some bark unfurls,
When newly launched, thy long mane[2] curls,
  Fair Steed, as white and free;
And spirits, from all the lake's deep bowers,
Glide o'er the blue wave scattering flowers,
  Around my love and thee.

Of all the sweet deaths that maidens die,
Whose lovers beneath the cold wave lie,
  Most sweet that death will be,
Which, under the next May evening's light,
When thou and thy steed are lost to sight,
Dear love, I'll die for thee.


Oh banquet not in those shining bowers,
  Where Youth resorts, but come to me:
For mine's a garden of faded flowers,
  More fit for sorrow, for age, and thee.
And there we shall have our feast of tears,
  And many a cup in silence pour;
Our guests, the shades of former years,
  Our toasts to lips that bloom no more.

There, while the myrtle's withering boughs
  Their lifeless leaves around us shed,
We'll brim the bowl to broken vows,
  To friends long lost, the changed, the dead.
Or, while some blighted laurel waves
  Its branches o'er the dreary spot,
We'll drink to those neglected graves,
  Where valor sleeps, unnamed, forgot.


  Oh, the sight entrancing,
When morning's beam is glancing,
    O'er files arrayed
    With helm and blade,
And plumes, in the gay wind dancing!
When hearts are all high beating,
And the trumpet's voice repeating
    That song, whose breath
    May lead to death,
But never to retreating.
Oh the sight entrancing,
When morning's beam is glancing
  O'er files arrayed
  With helm and blade,
And plumes, in the gay wind dancing.

Yet, 'tis not helm or feather--
For ask yon despot, whether
  His plumed bands
  Could bring such hands
And hearts as ours together.
Leave pomps to those who need 'em--
Give man but heart and freedom,
  And proud he braves
  The gaudiest slaves
That crawl where monarchs lead 'em.
The sword may pierce the beaver,
Stone walls in time may sever,
  'Tis mind alone,
  Worth steel and stone,
That keeps men free for ever.
Oh that sight entrancing,
When the morning's beam is glancing,
  O'er files arrayed
  With helm and blade,
And in Freedom's cause advancing!


Sail on, sail on, thou fearless bark--
  Wherever blows the welcome wind,
It cannot lead to scenes more dark,
  More sad than those we leave behind.
Each wave that passes seems to say,
  "Tho' death beneath our smile may be,
  Less cold we are, less false than they,
  Whose smiling wrecked thy hopes and thee."
Sail on, sail on,--thro' endless space--
  Thro' calm--thro' tempest--stop no more:
The stormiest sea's a resting place
  To him who leaves such hearts on shore.
Or--if some desert land we meet,
  Where never yet false-hearted men
Profaned a world, that else were sweet,--
  Then rest thee, bark, but not till then.


  Oh, ye Dead! oh, ye Dead![1] whom we know by the light you give
From your cold gleaming eyes, tho' you move like men who live,
  Why leave you thus your graves,
  In far off fields and waves,
Where the worm and the sea-bird only know your bed,
  To haunt this spot where all
  Those eyes that wept your fall,
And the hearts that wailed you, like your own, lie dead?

It is true, it is true, we are shadows cold and wan;
And the fair and the brave whom we loved on earth are gone;
  But still thus even in death,
  So sweet the living breath
Of the fields and the flowers in our youth we wander'd o'er,
  That ere, condemned, we go
  To freeze mid Hecla's snow,
We would taste it awhile, and think we live once more!


The dawning of morn, the daylight's sinking,
The night's long hours still find me thinking
    Of thee, thee, only thee.
When friends are met, and goblets crowned,
  And smiles are near, that once enchanted,
Unreached by all that sunshine round,
  My soul, like some dark spot, is haunted
    By thee, thee, only thee.

Whatever in fame's high path could waken
My spirit once, is now forsaken
    For thee, thee, only thee.
Like shores, by which some headlong bark
  To the ocean hurries, resting never,
Life's scenes go by me, bright or dark,
  I know not, heed not, hastening ever
    To thee, thee, only thee.

I have not a joy but of thy bringing,
And pain itself seems sweet when springing
    From thee, thee, only thee.
Like spells, that naught on earth can break,
  Till lips, that know the charm, have spoken,
This heart, howe'er the world may wake
  Its grief, its scorn, can but be broken
    By thee, thee, only thee.


    Shall the Harp then be silent, when he who first gave
  To our country a name, is withdrawn from all eyes?
Shall a Minstrel of Erin stand mute by the grave,
  Where the first--where the last of her Patriots lies?

No--faint tho' the death-song may fall from his lips,
  Tho' his Harp, like his soul, may with shadows be crost,
Yet, yet shall it sound, mid a nation's eclipse,
  And proclaim to the world what a star hath been lost;--[1]

What a union of all the affections and powers
  By which life is exalted, embellished, refined,
Was embraced in that spirit--whose centre was ours,
  While its mighty circumference circled mankind.

Oh, who that loves Erin, or who that can see,
  Thro' the waste of her annals, that epoch sublime--
Like a pyramid raised in the desert--where he
  And his glory stand out to the eyes of all time;

That _one_ lucid interval, snatched from the gloom
  And the madness of ages, when filled with his soul,
A Nation o'erleaped the dark bounds of her doom,
  And for _one_ sacred instant, touched Liberty's goal?

Who, that ever hath heard him--hath drank at the source
  Of that wonderful eloquence, all Erin's own,
In whose high-thoughted daring, the fire, and the force,
  And the yet untamed spring of her spirit are shown?

An eloquence rich, wheresoever its wave
  Wandered free and triumphant, with thoughts that shone thro',
As clear as the brook's "stone of lustre," and gave,
  With the flash of the gem, its solidity too.

Who, that ever approached him, when free from the crowd,
  In a home full of love, he delighted to tread
'Mong the trees which a nation had given, and which bowed,
  As if each brought a new civic crown for his head--

Is there one, who hath thus, thro' his orbit of life
  But at distance observed him--thro' glory, thro' blame,
In the calm of retreat, in the grandeur of strife,
  Whether shining or clouded, still high and the same,--

Oh no, not a heart, that e'er knew him, but mourns
  Deep, deep o'er the grave, where such glory is shrined--
O'er a monument Fame will preserve, 'mong the urns
  Of the wisest, the bravest, the best of mankind!


  Yes, sad one of Sion,[1] if closely resembling,
  In shame and in sorrow, thy withered-up heart--
If drinking deep, deep, of the same "cup of trembling"
  Could make us thy children, our parent thou art,

Like thee doth our nation lie conquered and broken,
  And fallen from her head is the once royal crown;
In her streets, in her halls, Desolation hath spoken,
  And "while it is day yet, her sun hath gone down."[2]

Like thine doth her exile, mid dreams of returning,
  Die far from the home it were life to behold;
Like thine do her sons, in the day of their mourning,
  Remember the bright things that blest them of old.

Ah, well may we call her, like thee "the Forsaken,"[3]
  Her boldest are vanquished, her proudest are slaves;
And the harps of her minstrels, when gayest they waken,
  Have tones mid their mirth like the wind over graves!

Yet hadst thou thy vengeance--yet came there the morrow,
  That shines out, at last, on the longest dark night,
When the sceptre, that smote thee with slavery and sorrow,
  Was shivered at once, like a reed, in thy sight.

When that cup, which for others the proud Golden City[4]
  Had brimmed full of bitterness, drenched her own lips;
And the world she had trampled on heard, without pity,
  The howl in her halls, and the cry from her ships.

When the curse Heaven keeps for the haughty came over
  Her merchants rapacious, her rulers unjust,
And, a ruin, at last, for the earthworm to cover,[5]
  The Lady of Kingdoms[6] lay low in the dust.