And doth not a meeting like this make amends,
  For all the long years I've been wandering away--
To see thus around me my youth's early friends,
  As smiling and kind as in that happy day?
Tho' haply o'er some of your brows, as o'er mine,
  The snow-fall of time may be stealing--what then?
Like Alps in the sunset, thus lighted by wine,
  We'll wear the gay tinge of youth's roses again.

What softened remembrances come o'er the heart,
  In gazing on those we've been lost to so long!
The sorrows, the joys, of which once they were part,
  Still round them, like visions of yesterday, throng,
As letters some hand hath invisibly traced,
  When held to the flame will steal out on the sight,
So many a feeling, that long seemed effaced,
  The warmth of a moment like this brings to light.

And thus, as in memory's bark we shall glide,
  To visit the scenes of our boyhood anew,
Tho' oft we may see, looking down on the tide,
  The wreck of full many a hope shining thro';
Yet still, as in fancy we point to the flowers,
  That once made a garden of all the gay shore,
Deceived for a moment, we'll think them still ours,
 And breathe the fresh air of life's morning once more.

So brief our existence, a glimpse, at the most,
  Is all we can have of the few we hold dear;
And oft even joy is unheeded and lost,
  For want of some heart, that could echo it, near.
Ah, well may we hope, when this short life is gone,
  To meet in some world of more permanent bliss,
For a smile, or a grasp of the hand, hastening on,
  Is all we enjoy of each other in this.

But, come, the more rare such delights to the heart,
  The more we should welcome and bless them the more;
They're ours, when we meet,--they are lost when we part,
  Like birds that bring summer, and fly when 'tis o'er.
Thus circling the cup, hand in hand, ere we drink,
  Let Sympathy pledge us, thro' pleasure, thro' pain,
That, fast as a feeling but touches one link,
  Her magic shall send it direct thro' the chain.


  As vanquished Erin wept beside
  The Boyne's ill-fated river,
She saw where Discord, in the tide,
  Had dropt his loaded quiver.
"Lie hid," she cried, "ye venomed darts,
  "Where mortal eye may shun you;
"Lie hid--the stain of manly hearts,
  "That bled for me, is on you."

But vain her wish, her weeping vain,--
  As Time too well hath taught her--
Each year the Fiend returns again,
  And dives into that water;
And brings, triumphant, from beneath
  His shafts of desolation,
And sends them, winged with worse than death,
  Through all her maddening nation.

Alas for her who sits and mourns,
  Even now, beside that river--
Unwearied still the Fiend returns,
  And stored is still his quiver.
"When will this end, ye Powers of Good?"
  She weeping asks for ever;
But only hears, from out that flood,
  The Demon answer, "Never!"


  By the Feal's wave benighted,
  No star in the skies,
To thy door by Love lighted,
  I first saw those eyes.
Some voice whispered o'er me,
  As the threshold I crost,
There was ruin before me,
  If I loved, I was lost.

Love came, and brought sorrow
  Too soon in his train;
Yet so sweet, that to-morrow
  'Twere welcome again.
Though misery's full measure
  My portion should be,
I would drain it with pleasure,
  If poured out by thee.

You, who call it dishonor
  To bow to this flame,
If you've eyes, look but on her,
  And blush while you blame.
Hath the pearl less whiteness
  Because of its birth?
Hath the violet less brightness
  For growing near earth?

No--Man for his glory
  To ancestry flies;
But Woman's bright story
  Is told in her eyes.

While the Monarch but traces
  Thro' mortals his line,
Beauty, born of the Graces,
  Banks next to Divine!


  Fairest! put on awhile
  These pinions of light I bring thee,
And o'er thy own green isle
  In fancy let me wing thee.
Never did Ariel's plume,
  At golden sunset hover
O'er scenes so full of bloom,
  As I shall waft thee over.

Fields, where the Spring delays
  And fearlessly meets the ardor
Of the warm Summer's gaze,
  With only her tears to guard her.
Rocks, thro' myrtle boughs
  In grace majestic frowning;
Like some bold warrior's brows
  That Love hath just been crowning.

Islets, so freshly fair,
  That never hath bird come nigh them,
But from his course thro' air
  He hath been won down by them;--[1]
Types, sweet maid, of thee,
  Whose look, whose blush inviting,
Never did Love yet see
  From Heaven, without alighting.

Lakes, where the pearl lies hid,[2]
  And caves, where the gem is sleeping,
Bright as the tears thy lid
  Lets fall in lonely weeping.
Glens,[3] where Ocean comes,
  To 'scape the wild wind's rancor,
And harbors, worthiest homes
  Where Freedom's fleet can anchor.

Then, if, while scenes so grand,
  So beautiful, shine before thee,
Pride for thy own dear land
  Should haply be stealing o'er thee,
Oh, let grief come first,
  O'er pride itself victorious--
Thinking how man hath curst
  What Heaven had made so glorious!


  I wish I was by that dim Lake,[1]
Where sinful souls their farewell take
Of this vain world, and half-way lie
In death's cold shadow, ere they die.
There, there, far from thee,
Deceitful world, my home should be;
Where, come what might of gloom and pain,
False hope should ne'er deceive again.

The lifeless sky, the mournful sound
Of unseen waters falling round;
The dry leaves, quivering o'er my head,
Like man, unquiet even when dead!
These, ay, these shall wean
My soul from life's deluding scene,
And turn each thought, o'ercharged with gloom,
Like willows, downward towards the tomb.

As they, who to their couch at night
Would win repose, first quench the light,
So must the hopes, that keep this breast
Awake, be quenched, ere it can rest.
Cold, cold, this heart must grow,
Unmoved by either joy or woe,
Like freezing founts, where all that's thrown
Within their current turns to stone.


In yonder valley there dwelt, alone,
A youth, whose moments had calmly flown,
Till spells came o'er him, and, day and night,
He was haunted and watched by a Mountain Sprite.

As once, by moonlight, he wander'd o'er
The golden sands of that island shore,
A foot-print sparkled before his sight--
'Twas the fairy foot of the Mountain Sprite!

Beside a fountain, one sunny day,
As bending over the stream he lay,
There peeped down o'er him two eyes of light,
And he saw in that mirror the Mountain Sprite.

He turned, but, lo, like a startled bird,
That spirit fled!--and the youth but heard
Sweet music, such as marks the flight
Of some bird of song, from the Mountain Sprite.

One night, still haunted by that bright look,
The boy, bewildered, his pencil took,
And, guided only by memory's light,
Drew the once-seen form of the Mountain Sprite.

"Oh thou, who lovest the shadow," cried
A voice, low whispering by his side,
"Now turn and see,"--here the youth's delight
Sealed the rosy lips of the Mountain Sprite.

"Of all the Spirits of land and sea,"
Then rapt he murmured, "there's none like thee,
"And oft, oh oft, may thy foot thus light
"In this lonely bower, sweet Mountain Sprite!"


Quick! we have but a second,
  Fill round the cup, while you may;
For Time, the churl, hath beckoned,
  And we must away, away!
Grasp the pleasure that's flying,
  For oh, not Orpheus' strain
Could keep sweet hours from dying,
  Or charm them to life again.
    Then, quick! we have but a second,
      Fill round the cup while you may;
    For Time, the churl, hath beckoned,
      And we must away, away!

See the glass, how it flushes.
  Like some young Hebe's lip,
And half meets thine, and blushes
  That thou shouldst delay to sip.
Shame, oh shame unto thee,
  If ever thou see'st that day,
When a cup or lip shall woo thee,
  And turn untouched away!
    Then, quick! we have but a second,
      Fill round, fill round, while you may;
    For Time, the churl, hath beckoned,
      And we must away, away!


      She sung of Love, while o'er her lyre
  The rosy rays of evening fell,
As if to feed with their soft fire
  The soul within that trembling shell.
The same rich light hung o'er her cheek,
  And played around those lips that sung
And spoke, as flowers would sing and speak,
  If Love could lend their leaves a tongue.

But soon the West no longer burned,
  Each rosy ray from heaven withdrew;
And, when to gaze again I turned,
  The minstrel's form seemed fading too.
As if _her_ light and heaven's were one,
  The glory all had left that frame;
And from her glimmering lips the tone,
  As from a parting spirit, came.

Who ever loved, but had the thought
  That he and all he loved must part?
Filled with this fear, I flew and caught
  The fading image to my heart--
And cried, "Oh Love! is this thy doom?
  "Oh light of youth's resplendent day!
"Must ye then lose your golden bloom,
  "And thus, like sunshine, die away?"


  Sing--sing--Music was given,
  To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
Souls here, like planets in Heaven,
  By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.
Beauty may boast of her eyes and her cheeks,
  But Love from the lips his true archery wings;
And she, who but feathers the dart when she speaks,
  At once sends it home to the heart when she sings.
  Then sing--sing--Music was given,
    To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
  Souls here, like planets in Heaven,
    By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.

When Love, rocked by his mother,
  Lay sleeping as calm as slumber could make him,
"Hush, hush," said Venus, "no other
  "Sweet voice but his own is worthy to wake him."
Dreaming of music he slumbered the while
  Till faint from his lip a soft melody broke,
And Venus, enchanted, looked on with a smile,
  While Love to his own sweet singing awoke.
  Then sing--sing--Music was given,
    To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
  Souls here, like planets in Heaven,
    By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.


    Sweet Innisfallen, fare thee well,
  May calm and sunshine long be thine!
How fair thou art let others tell,--
  To _feel_ how fair shall long be mine.

Sweet Innisfallen, long shall dwell
  In memory's dream that sunny smile,
Which o'er thee on that evening fell,
  When first I saw thy fairy isle.

'Twas light, indeed, too blest for one,
  Who had to turn to paths of care--
Through crowded haunts again to run,
  And leave thee bright and silent there;

No more unto thy shores to come,
  But, on the world's rude ocean tost,
Dream of thee sometimes, as a home
  Of sunshine he had seen and lost.

Far better in thy weeping hours
  To part from thee, as I do now,
When mist is o'er thy blooming bowers,
  Like sorrow's veil on beauty's brow.

For, though unrivalled still thy grace,
  Thou dost not look, as then, _too_ blest,
But thus in shadow, seem'st a place
  Where erring man might hope to rest--

Might hope to rest, and find in thee
  A gloom like Eden's on the day
He left its shade, when every tree,
  Like thine, hung weeping o'er his way.

Weeping or smiling, lovely isle!
  And all the lovelier for thy tears--
For tho' but rare thy sunny smile,
  'Tis heaven's own glance when it appears.

Like feeling hearts, whose joys are few,
  But, when _indeed_ they come divine--
The brightest light the sun e'er threw
  Is lifeless to one gleam of thine!


  They know not my heart, who believe there can be
One stain of this earth in its feelings for thee;
Who think, while I see thee in beauty's young hour,
As pure as the morning's first dew on the flower,
I could harm what I love,--as the sun's wanton ray
But smiles on the dew-drop to waste it away.

No--beaming with light as those young features are,
There's a light round thy heart which is lovelier far:
It is not that cheek--'tis the soul dawning clear
Thro' its innocent blush makes thy beauty so dear:
As the sky we look up to, tho' glorious and fair,
Is looked up to the more, because Heaven lies there!


'Twas one of those dreams, that by music are brought,
Like a bright summer haze, o'er the poet's warm thought--
When, lost in the future, his soul wanders on,
And all of this life, but its sweetness, is gone.

The wild notes he heard o'er the water were those
He had taught to sing Erin's dark bondage and woes,
And the breath of the bugle now wafted them o'er
From Dinis' green isle, to Glenà's wooded shore.

He listened--while, high o'er the eagle's rude nest,
The lingering sounds on their way loved to rest;
And the echoes sung back from their full mountain choir,
As if loath to let song so enchanting expire.

It seemed as if every sweet note, that died here,
Was again brought to life in some airier sphere,
Some heaven in those hills, where the soul of the strain
They had ceased upon earth was awaking again!

Oh forgive, if, while listening to music, whose breath
Seemed to circle his name with a charm against death,
He should feel a proud Spirit within him proclaim,
"Even so shalt thou live in the echoes of Fame:

"Even so, tho' thy memory should now die away,
'Twill be caught up again in some happier day,
And the hearts and the voices of Erin prolong,
Through the answering Future, thy name and thy song."